Hello everyone, welcome to another episode of  coding adventures. Today, we’re back to chess.  
So what I’d like to do is take this  little chess-playing program that we   made about two or three years ago now,  and figure out how good it actually is.  
My plan for doing that is to simply let it loose  on a popular chess website called ‘lichess’ — as  
a registered bot account of course — and  see what sort of rating it ends up with.  
Before we do that though, I can’t resist trying  to make it just a little bit stronger, so that   it’s hopefully able to put up a good fight. Now to test whether the changes we make are  
Battle of the Bots
actually helpful or not, I’ve started by making  a little program called the match manager, and  
the idea is that we’ll be able to connect up two  different versions of our chess program, so we can   have the the new version battle the old version to  make sure we haven’t accidentally made it worse!  
They need to play a wide variety of positions for  it to be a good test though, so I’d like to start  
each game from a random position. To get some random test positions,   I’ve gone over to the lichess  database to download a bunch of games.  
Wait a minute, this is 35 gigabytes for one  month of games — that’s… that’s too much chess.  
Let’s go back in time to something a bit more  manageable. Okay, 500 megabytes I can work with.  
So we now have this file of two and half millions  games in the portable game notation format,  
and I like that it also includes the name of  the opening, because if we choose games that   started with different openings, that should  ensure some more variety in our test set.  
Okay, I’ve just finished struggling to write  some simple *python* code for a change,   because I wanted to use this nice library  to extract random positions from the games  
where there’re still lots of pieces left  to avoid any totally boring positions.  
Running this took a couple of minutes to finish,  but if we just fast-forward time — we now have  
a list of positions in the ‘FEN’ notation we  talked about in the last video. But, I only want  
positions that are roughly equal for our test set.  So with some help from the internet, I’ve managed   to get some code working that automatically  feeds each position into stockfish — one of the  
strongest chess programs in existence — to filter  out all the ones that are unfair to either side.  
With that done, I’m going try running a full match  between two copies of version 1, just to make sure  
everything goes smoothly. They’re playing 500  different positions, both as black and white,  
so 1000 games in total, with a generous  thinking time of 100 milliseconds per move.  
This’ll probably take a few hours to run,   so feel free to have a nap, and  I’ll wake you up when it’s done.  
You won’t be shocked to learn that it  was a pretty even match between version   1 and version 1, with the one version  1 winning 347 games, and losing 355.  
So with our test setup working, let’s  try to actually improve the program.   I’d say there’re two main areas we  can focus on: search and evaluation.  
And let’s start with search, because while that  test was running I’ve been looking back at some   of this old code, and I noticed something  nice and easy that we can begin with.  
Maybe Don’t Throw Away the Best Move?
So we’re doing something here called  iterative deepening, which is a fancy   name for just first searching one move ahead.  Then, if the search hasn’t been cancelled yet,  
we increase that to search two moves ahead,  and so on. And that way, no matter when the  
search is cancelled, we’ll always have the move  from the previous iteration ready to play.  
At least, that’s what I thought when I wrote  this. I thought that once the search is cancelled,   we just have to throw away all the work from the  current unfinished iteration, because how could  
we trust what it says is the best move, when it  hasn’t looked at all the possible moves yet?  
But that’s a bit silly, because so long as  we begin each new search by looking at the   best move from the previous iteration,  then say that search is cancelled half  
way through — either it will still think  that’s the best move — in which case no   harm done — or it will have found a better  move, which we should obviously take.  
So I’ll change things around a bit here so that  it accepts the new result even if that search  
iteration was incomplete, and then in the  giant mess that is the main search function,   I’ll just make sure that when we’re choosing  the order in which we’re looking at the moves,  
we guarantee that the best move from  the previous iteration comes first.  
Okay, so let’s just play a few moves  to make sure I haven’t broken anything…  
Okay it looks like I’ve broken  something. It wants to make the move   a1 to a1. Which is definitely not allowed. That’s actually how I represent a null move,  
because to try be efficient with memory during  the search, I’ve packed all the information about   a move into a 16-bit value, with the first  6 bits giving the index of the start square,  
the next 6 giving the index of the target  square, and the last 4 bits being a special flag   for things like promotions and so on. So an ‘invalid’ or ‘null’ move, which  
I’ve just assigned the value 0, tells us to move  from square 0 to square 0. Which is a1 to a1.  
So I guess the problem arises if the search  iteration is cancelled before it can even   finish looking at the first move, meaning we  just need to add a little null check over here.  
Alright, with that fixed, I’ve set up  a match, and let’s see how it goes.  
Okay the results are in for Version  2 vs Version 1, and we have 141 wins  
to 836 losses. Uh, clearly I’ve made a huge  mistake. I have no clue what it is though.  
So I’ve started by looking at one of the games it  played, and it is making catastrophic blunders,  
like playing Qb6 in this position, where it  can of course just be captured by the bishop.  
Delving into the search logs, we can see  it begins by wanting to play the far more   sensible knight f6, and this remains its  top choice through all the iterations,  
where it thinks its a little bit  worse — until the search is cancelled,   when it suddenly thinks the position is  dead equal, and blunders the queen instead.  
Okay, this has lead me to discovering  a really sloppy mistake in my old code,   which is that when the search is cancelled, it  returns 0 immediately at the top of the function,  
which is fine. But what evidently slipped past  me’s mind, is that this a recursive function,  
so that’s not the end of the story… That zero  is going to show up as the evaluation over here,   so if it thought the position was worse  before, suddenly it sees — wow! I can get  
an equal position by making whatever random  move the search happened to be cancelled on.   The only reason this wasn’t wreaking havoc  before is that I was wastefully discarding  
the results from the unfinished search,  but now that we are using those results,   we can just add another exit point here so that  we do actually quit the search immediately.  
Alright, running the test match  again with this fix… gives us a   score of 409 wins to 270 losses,  which is much more encouraging.  
Transposition Troubles
Something I realized while this was running  though, is that before we fixed the search to   actually exit immediately when cancelled, those  faulty evaluations would have been stored in the  
transposition table, which is just a giant lookup  table we use to avoid constantly re-evaluating  
positions that we’ve come across already. So up here where we’re starting the search,  
I had originally left this bewildered comment  about having to completely clear the transposition  
table before each new search, to ward off  mysterious blunders. I guess, now we know why!  
I’m very excited to delete this horrible  little line of code, and now with the   stored evaluations persisting across moves,  the search should be a lot more efficient,  
so let’s run a test against our previous version.  Alright, this has come back with 399 wins to 387  
losses, which is very underwhelming. I really  expected that to make a bigger difference.  
Okay, I’ve been investigating a bit, because  I was confused by that result — and what I’m  
seeing is that the transposition table is  getting filled up suspiciously quickly,   meaning it very soon has to start overwriting  old positions. The reason it’s suspicious is  
that I’m using a gigantic 1 gigabyte table, and  there’s no way it should be filling up that fast.  
Okay my face is starting to hurt from all the  facepalming I’m doing today. I have some code   for reporting the size of the transposition table,  and it does this by first figuring out the size  
of each entry in bytes, which it then multiplies  by the number of entries, divides by a thousand,  
and says — that’s the size megabytes. This dodgy maths means that the table  
wasn’t a whole gigabyte like I thought,  but actually just about a single megabyte.   While we’re here fixing this, let’s actually  quickly change this calculation around so  
that instead of specifying the number  of entries we want, we’ll calculate the   number of entries based on the desired size in  megabytes, because that’s a much more intuitive  
setting. And let’s maybe set it to a modest  64, because that seems nice and thematic.  
I’ll then try this out again on  the same position, and we can   that it’s filling up a lot more slowly now. So I’ll run the match once more with the new  
64 megabyte table, and this time we get 386 wins  to 246 losses. So a fairly significant upgrade.  
Now I think that always testing against  the most recent version is a good way to   judge if the program has improved, but  to keep track of our overall progress,  
I also want to keep a record of how each  version compares to the original version 1.  
So far we have version 1 against itself — not  terribly interesting. Then there’s version 2,  
which no longer wastes the results  of incomplete searches. And now we   can add our latest build with the fixes to the  transpositions table, and against version one,  
that is scoring 484 wins to 218 losses. Alright, now I’ve been spending a bit of  
time doing some research: trawling through  various discussions and heated arguments on   old chess programming forums, trying to find the  specific version of an archive of a site where  
the link to the article I want to read actually  works…. and of course going down the incredible   rabbithole that is the chessprogramming wiki,  where one moment you’re reading a mundane article  
about the names of different types of nodes in a  search tree, and the next you blink and suddenly  
it’s dark outside and you find you’re consulting  a chart about the movement of knights and how that  
relates to the orbital period of mercury,  and you ask yourself, how did I get here?  
Suffice it to say, I have  plenty new ideas to try now.   One of these is a technique called  search extensions. So at the moment  
Search Extensions
we look equally deeply into all  moves, but it’d probably be wise   to pay special attention to the  most potentially interesting ones.  
For example, we could say that if the current move  puts the opponent in check, then we’ll extend the  
search to go one move deeper. Just to prevent  things from possibly getting out of hand though,  
I’ll set an arbitrary limit on how deep  these extensions can actually take us.  
Alright, I’ve tested this in a match against  our previous build, and it scored 433 wins,  
to 237 losses, which is a really nice  improvement for such a simple idea.  
I also tested it against version 1 for interest’s  sake, where it scored 561 wins to 169 losses. So  
we’re seeing some pretty consistent progress so  far — hopefully it’s going to stay that way.   Okay, I’ve just quickly separated out the  extension logic to its own tiny function,  
because things were getting quite cluttered,  but it’s doing the same thing as before.   So now let’s try extending the search for  other types of moves as well. For example,  
if a pawn is on the verge of promoting, we  should probably keep searching to find out   whether that’s going to be successful or not. So let’s find out what type of piece was moved,  
and also what rank it was moved to, and then we  can just write a little if statement that says   if we’ve just moved a pawn, and it’s now on the  7th rank — so index 6, or the 2nd rank — which  
is index 1, then we’ll want to extend the  search by one move, and let’s see if this  
extension also makes such a big difference. Uh, it made a big difference all right.  
We’re now getting 107 wins to 610  losses. That’s very unfortunate.  
Okay, I was about to delete this code when I  realized I’ve actually blundered my brackets   here. The problem is just that AND has a higher  precedence than OR, so we’re not actually testing  
if a pawn has reached either the 7th or 2nd rank,  but rather, if a pawn has reached the 7th rank,  
OR something has just moved to the 2nd  rank. So that means we’re extending loads  
of totally uninteresting moves and wasting  an enormous amount of precious search time.  
Let me fix that quickly, and run the match again.   Okay this time the score has ended up at 337 wins  to 273 losses. Not nearly as big a difference as  
the check extension, but definitely helping  out a little. As always, I’ll also test this  
against version 1… but it actually doesn’t seem  to be doing any better than the previous build,  
which is a bit surprising to me, but I guess it  makes sense that improving against one opponent  
doesn’t necessarily guarantee that you’ll  play better against a different opponent.  
Anyway, I’ve been experimenting with a few other  extensions behind the scenes, such as extending if  
a pawn actually manages to promote to a queen,  and also extending when a player has only one  
legal move available, but these didn’t seem to  help the program at all, so I’ll leave them out.  
Refactoring and Recapping
While all these tests have been running,  I’ve mainly just been going through and   refactoring all the code, since I  left it in quite a mess last time.  
There’s nothing exciting to show from all  this of course — everything should behave   exactly the same as before. Except…. that’s  not how chess works! What have I done?  
Okay this first move advantage  is getting out of hand…   Fortunately I was able to enlist the  help of a professional bug hunter,  
who was very helpful in fixing the problem. Alright, so with the code tidied up,  
and everything behaving again, let’s get back to  making the engine stronger. We’ve spent a bit of  
time improving the search already, so let’s  work on the evaluation a bit for a change.  
At the moment, our evaluation function considers  just three simple terms. The first of these is  
the amount of pieces on the board. So it adds up  the number of pawns, multiplied by the value of  
a pawn, plus the number of knights multiplied  by the value of a knight, and so on. And of   course these are just very generalized  estimates of what each piece is worth.  
The second term takes into account where on the  board each piece is located. So for example,  
these are the square scores for knights,  meaning that knights on more central   squares will be valued more highly, since  they’re able to control more squares.  
Finally, the third term is this Mop-Up  score. Basically when we have an advantage  
in the endgame, we want to encourage the  king to move closer to the enemy king,   to help push it to the edge of the board  where it’s easier to deliver checkmate.  
Here’s an example of that term in action.   Now I think the program plays surprisingly  well for having such a limited understanding  
of the game, but let’s try giving it  some extra knowledge to work with.  
Tweaking Kings and Pawns
To begin with, let’s take a look at those square  scores again, this time for the king. We can  
see that these scores are simply encouraging the  king to find shelter on either edge of the board,   and discouraging him from charging into enemy  territory, because he’s not a very good fighter.  
Once the dust of the opening and middle game has  settled though, and we move into the endgame phase  
with not so many scary pieces left on the board,  the king should stop cowering in a corner, and  
start thinking about being useful for once in his  life by supporting the advancement of the friendly  
pawns, or getting in the way of the enemy pawns. So I have a second table of king square scores  
here to entice the king to move more towards  the centre of the board. And we can just  
blend between these two tables based on  the number of remaining enemy pieces.  
I actually started implementing this last  episode already, but ending up leaving it   out because I felt like the king was being  a bit too aggressive, and I didn’t have  
the energy to tweak and test it. Now that we have this nice little   testing framework though, we can just  let the match run, and see how it goes!  
Okay, the results are in — and the side with the  aggressive king has ended up with 385 wins to 276  
losses. Not bad! And playing against version  1, it’s now scoring 630 wins, to 137 losses.  
That was pretty effective, so let’s try  doing a similar thing for the pawns.   Currently, they’re being encouraged  to move up the board to become queens,  
but we also have this conflicting goal of holding  back these two groups of pawns here and here,  
in case the king wants to  take shelter behind them.   In the endgame we don’t need to worry about that  as much though, so I’ve added a second pawn table  
to the code for the endame, and let’s just quickly  set up some scores here… I’ll give both the second  
and third rank a score of 10, because from a  pawn’s perspective, they’re the same distance   from the end of the the board. And then we can  just increase the score for each subsequent rank.  
Okay, I’ll now employ my highly  sophisticated system of copying the   string of values this little editor prints  out, and then pasting that into the code.  
Alright, testing this, we’ve ended up with a  small improvement of dubious significance — 365  
wins to 353 losses. I’d be curious to know the  probability that the new version is actually  
better than the old version based on this score —  so if there’re any statisticians watching — please  
let me know how to calculate that! Anyway, against version 1 it actually does seem to  
have helped a fair bit, taking us up to 670 wins  to 142 losses, so that’s nice to see at least.  
Alright, so with this table we’re encouraging  all pawns to move up the board in the endgame,  
but certain pawns are going to have a better  chance of becoming queens than others.  
For example, this white pawn on the left here  is blocked by the black pawn in front of it,  
so it won’t be able to make it through on  its own. Then this pawn in the middle does   have a clear path ahead of it, but it’s probably  going to be captured along the way. And finally,  
this pawn over here is known as a passed pawn,  because there’re no enemy pawns that can block  
or capture it on its path to queendom. Age-old chess wisdom tells us: ‘passed  
pawns must be pushed’, so I reckon we should  give our bot a bonus for doing the same.  
But first, we need an efficient way of  actually detecting passed pawns — and  
I’d like to try do that using bitboards. So a bitboard is really just a single number  
Bitboards!
that represents some aspect of the current  position. For example, the number 65280,  
would represent the locations of all  the white pawns in this position.   That’ll make a lot more sense if we look  at the number the way the computer sees it,  
which is to say as a 64bit binary number  — in this case made up of 48 zeros,  
followed by 8 ones, and finally another 8 zeros. So in the code, we can represent a bitboard as a  
‘ulong’ which is just a 64 bit integer,  and I’ll actually make an array of these   so that we can have bitboards for all the  different types of pieces if we want.  
Now there’re a bunch of different operations  we can do with binary numbers. For example,  
the bitwise OR operation of A and B, gives us  a binary value with ones in the places where  
either A OR B is set to one. Then there’s the  AND operation which gives us this, with ones  
in places where both A AND B are set to one. We  also have the Exclusive OR operation, which gives  
us this — with ones in places where either A is  set to one, or B is set to one, but not both.  
Another useful tool we have are these left  and right ‘shift’ operators. So for example,   if we take the value 1 and ‘shift’ it 4 bits  left we get, well… exactly what you’d expect.  
Okay so, in the code when we’re loading in  each piece to set up the starting position,  
we can look up the bitboard corresponding to the  current piece type, and do a bitwise OR operation  
on its current value, with the value 1, shifted  over by the index of the square that that piece  
is on. And that will setup all our bitboards. Of course we also need to update them whenever  
a piece is moved, so over here we can just lookup  the bitboard for the type of piece we’re moving,  
and use the Exclusive Or operation this time to  toggle the bits so that the starting square gets  
set to 0, and the target square gets set to 1. Also, if this move captured a piece, we’ll need  
to make sure that on the bitboard of the captured  piece type, the target square is toggled to zero.  
I think that should work, but  let’s try it out to make sure!   So I’ll move this pawn up, and we can  see the start square was toggled off,  
and the target square toggled on. Let’s  also make sure that captures are working,  
so I’ll let the knight snack on this pawn,  and it has been removed from the bitboard.  
So this seems to be working well… Although  I just realized something actually. There’s   that pesky en-passant move of course, always  making my life just a bit more difficult…  
Alright, I’ve been working on this for a while,  and I think I’ve covered all of the edge cases.   We do only need the pawn bitboards at the moment,  but I got a little carried away and created this  
test interface here, so we can easily flip  through the bitboards for all the different   pieces and make sure they’re working. Let’s test that en-passant capture first,  
so I’ll set up a position quickly…  aaaand that’s looking good.  
Another edge case is castling — because of  course when the king moves we need to update   not just its bitboard, but the rook’s bitboard  as well. And then finally, if a pawn promotes to  
a queen for example, then that promotion  square needs to be added to the queens   bitboard and removed from the pawns bitboard. We can also do things like have one really  
long line of code that ORs together all the  bitboards of the white pieces for example,   and that will give us a single bitboard  telling us the locations of every white  
piece which could maybe be useful in the future  — I don’t know I’m just messing around a bit.  
To be clear though, this bitboard can’t tell  us what type of piece is on each square,   which is why need multiple bitboards  to fully represent the position.  
This actually reminds of a really great video by  Tom7, where he creates all sorts of strange chess  
bots, one of which is piece-blind — meaning  it just gets two bitboards, one for the white   pieces and one for the black pieces, and it  has to try figure out what to do from there.  
Anyway, if you haven’t already left to watch that  far more entertaining video, let’s finally get to   work on the passed pawn detection we wanted to do.  So to tell if this is a passed pawn for instance,  
Passed Pawns (and more)
we need to look at these squares in front of  it, and see if there’re any enemy pawns there.   So let’s try calculate a bit mask that  covers this region. As a starting point,  
let’s just write ulong.maxvalue, and that’ll  give us a bitboard with all bits set to 1.  
Now we should be able to move this  whole mask up the board, by shifting   all the bits 8 spaces over. Uh, that’s not the  direction I wanted… Let me try that again!  
Okay, so that shifts everything *one* rank up,  but we want to shift it 3 ranks in the case,  
since that’s where this pawn is. So in the code, I already have a   function for converting a square index  to a rank index, and we can just multiply  
the 8 by that rank index plus 1. With that we’ve managed to isolate   the squares that lie ahead of the pawn, but  we’re only actually interested in the three  
files surrounding the pawn where it can  be blocked or captured by an enemy pawn.   So let’s start now by figuring out a mask for just  a single file, like the A file here for example.  
I can’t think of a clever way to do this,  so I guess we’ll just write it out by hand.   Every eighth bit should be a 1, so… 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8, 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8,  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8, 1 2 3 4 — Wait a second…  there’s a much less painful way to do this.  
Hexadecimal to the rescue! Alright, so here is our A file mask,  
and now we can just shift this around however  we want. So if we calculate the file index for  
the given square, and then shift the A file  mask by that many bits, here’s what we get.  
Now we also want to include the two adjacent  files, so for file on the left that just means   shifting one less, and on the right would be  shifting one more. We don’t want to go off  
the edge of the board though because that’ll wrap  around weirdly, so let’s do some quick clamping,   and then we can just combine all three of those  together into a triple file mask by ORing them  
together. And let’s see how that looks. Okay, we’re pretty much done,  
we just need to combine the two masks into one.  So let’s take that forward mask we calculated  
earlier, and return that, but ANDed with the  triple file mask, so that only where both  
masks have their bits set to 1, will end up as 1. Aand after all this messing about, we’ve managed  
to create the passed pawn mask we wanted. Behind  the scenes I’ve also made a version for the black   pawns going in the other direction. Okay, now to make use of all this,  
I’ve written a little function that evaluates  passed pawn. So for each of our pawns on the  
board we get the appropriate passed pawn mask,  which has been precomputed and stored in an array,   and then we can simply AND that with the enemy  pawn bitboard, and if that results in zero,  
it means that no enemy pawns are in  the way, and so it is a passed pawn.   Calculating it like this should be pretty  efficient, since we don’t need to loop  
over all the enemy pawns to find out if  they’re in the way, or anything like that.   Anyway, we give each passed pawn a little bonus,  and here are the bonus values I’ve chosen.  
So 90 if its one square from promoting, 60  if its two squares from promoting, and so on.  
These numbers have been pulled from  thin air, so we should actually test   and tweak them at some point to try figure  out what values would actually work best.  
But for now, let’s just run a little test match,  and see how it goes. Alright — we’ve ended up  
with 415 wins to 325 losses, that’s a decent  improvement I’d say. And against version 1 we  
can see a rather modest improvement over  last time with 687 wins to 137 losses.  
Now a passed pawn is even more valuable if it’s  protected by another pawn, because obviously  
that raises its chance of surviving, so I’ve  added some code for detecting and rewarding   that — but mysteriously it’s actually just  made the program play a little bit worse.  
So let’s try something else instead. In  this position, white has two pawns that are   isolated — which just means there are no friendly  pawns on the adjacent files that could ever  
support them, and in general these are a bit of  a liability. We can very easily use our bitboards  
again to test for these isolated pawns, and  apply a penalty depending on how many there are.  
Trying this out in a match, we get a modest  396 wins to 341 losses against the previous  
version — and against version 1, we’re  now up to 717 wins against 139 losses.  
Magic Bitboards (minus the magic)
Alright so we’ve improved the  evaluation function a tiny bit,   but now that we have all these bitboards set  up, I’d like to try using them to speed up our  
move generation, using an interesting  technique called ‘magic bitboards’.  
Beginning with the rook, I’ve so far just  calculated a bitboard for each of the 64   starting squares, which simply tells us which  squares the rook is able to reach from there.  
That’s assuming the board is  completely empty though — of   course in reality there’s usually going to  be some annoying pieces getting in the way.  
What we’re aiming for here, is to be able to take  this bitboard of all the pieces that lie along the  
path of the rook, and use it as a key to lookup  what moves the rook is legally able to make.  
So essentially, we want to precompute the  legal moves for every possible arrangement   of blocking pieces, so that the move  generator has less work to do at runtime.  
Now technically, only the first piece that the  rook encounters in each direction is blocking its  
path, any pieces after that are irrelevant.  So we *could* reduce the size of the lookup  
if we ignored those irrelevant pieces, since  that’s fewer configurations we need to store.  
Unfortunately, that would mean that whenever we  want to lookup the legal moves, we would have to   have a loop running in every direction to find out  where the first piece is that’s blocking the path,  
but that’s essentially how the move generation  works at the moment, and is exactly what we’re  
trying to avoid. So for the sake of speed,  our lookup table is going to have to include   lots of redundant piece arrangements. Anyway, that means that our task now it  
to figure out all the different arrangements of  pieces we could have along these 4 directions.  
The way I’m thinking about this, is that we’re  essentially counting in binary. So for example,   this would be one. And we can see that up here.  This would be two, this would be three — four,  
five, six, seven and so on. But remember  we don’t care about these squares,  
only about the squares where the rook can  potentially move. So instead we’re going to   say that only places where this movement mask is  set to one, are actually valid binary digits.  
So in that case, this would actually  be one, since that’s the first valid   place according to the movement mask. And so  this would then be two. This would be three.  
4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and  so on for all 16384 different possibilities.  
So that leads us to a nice and  easy way to implement this in code,   which goes like this: We’re given  the movement mask, and we start by  
just creating a list of the indices of all  the bits that are set to 1 in that mask.  
So for this mask for example, that’s  index 4, index 12, index 20, and so on.  
Now the total number of piece arrangements  we’re going to have, is simply however many   numbers can fit in that many bits. Which is  just 2 to the power of the number of bits.  
We’re then going to count from 0 up to the total  number of possible piece arrangements, and for  
each of them, simply take the current number and  shift each of its bits into the valid places.  
So just as an example, say we’re on number 13,  which in binary is 1101, all the code does is  
shift those bits into these places here like this.  And that represents this arrangement of pieces.  
So using that code, we can now browse  through all the different patterns….   so here we’ve landed on 4081. Then here  is… 10815. And here’s where it ends.  
Okay so what I’ve done now is just made a gigantic  dictionary by looping over every square in the  
board, then generating all the arrangements of  pieces that could block the rook’s movement from   that square, and finally just figuring out what  legal moves the rook would have in each case,  
and adding that information to the dictionary. So now, given the square the rook is on,  
and the current arrangement of blockers, we can  just directly lookup the bitboard of legal moves.  
And we can see that seems to be working. One important detail though, is that these  
blockers are all being treated like enemy  pieces, meaning the rook can move onto them   to capture them. So we’ll need to add  a fix for friendly pieces later on.  
But anyway, since we’re treating them like  enemy pieces, that actually means that for   the last square in each direction, it doesn’t  matter if there’s a blocker there or not,  
the result will be the same regardless.  And so we don’t need to include those in   the piece arrangements we’re generating, which  greatly reduces the size of our lookuptable.  
Another important detail, is that if I try  place a blocker somewhere over here for example,   that’s going to break everything, because it’s  not a pattern that we included in the dictionary.  
So in the move generator, when we want to actually  figure out what moves a rook is able to make from   a certain square, we first combine the friendly  pieces and enemy pieces into a single bitboard,  
and then AND that with this mask here. The mask looks like this — it’s just the  
movement mask, but stopping one square short  in each direction like we talked about.  
That will clear out any pieces from squares we  don’t care about, so that we end up with a valid  
key which we can then use to look up the move  bitboard from the dictionary. Finally we extract  
the squares that the rook can move to from that  bitboard using this efficient little loop here.  
Right now though, the rook is able to capture  friendly pieces since we’re treating all blockers   as enemy pieces, so to get around this, we just  need to take the bitboard of friendly pieces,  
then invert it — meaning the ones become  zeros and the zeros become ones — and  
then use that to clear out the friendly  occupied squares from the moves bitboard.   Finally, a little bit more fiddling was required  for handling things like pins and checks,  
but that was fairly easy to adapt  from the old move generation code.   So after all this work, I’m excited to announce  that the move generation is about 20% slower.  
The Magical Part of Magic Bitboards
For possibly the first time ever though, I  think my code is not actually what’s slowing  
things down — but rather the problem is  this standard dictionary we’re using.   Obviously it is designed to be fast, but  it does also have to be general purpose,  
whereas we have a fixed set of data that we know  ahead of time, and so we can create a lookup  
table optimized specifically for that data. So as an example, let’s say we have the rook on  
this square here, and we also have some bitboard  of blockers… From that we’ll want to generate  
a key — which is simply going to be the index  into an array where the corresponding bitboard   of precomputed valid moves will be stored. Now we can’t just use use the blockers bitboard  
directly as the index, because this number is  huge — it’s in the quadrillions — and it would   be preferable if our lookup table could  actually fit in the computer’s memory.  
So the first thing we need to do is  get our hands on a ‘magic’ number.   And what’s magical about it is that it has  a special property that we don’t know how to  
calculate, we just have to try lots of different  random numbers until we find one that works.   And yes, we are only now getting to  the ‘magic’ part of magic bitboards.  
Now, this special property is that when we  multiply it with any of the possible blocker  
bitboards for the current starting square, the  result will have all the ‘important bits’ as far  
on the left as possible, with the bits further  to the right being basically garbage. And I’ll  
explain what I mean by that in a moment. But then, we’re going to shift everything   over by some number of places, so that  only these allegedly important bits remain,  
leaving us with a reasonably small number,  which’ll be our index into the array.  
So this bitboard of moves we have here is  going to be stored at index 131. And assuming  
that our magic number and our shift value  were well chosen, then this index will be  
unique to this particular move bitboard. So when  I talked about some of the bits being important,  
and some being garbage, the garbage is just all  the bits to the right that we can get rid of,   and still end up with a unique index. So as we’ve seen already, this moves  
bitboard will be stored at index 131. If we remove  this blocker over here though, we get a different  
move bitboard, and that’s going to be stored at  index 127. Then this one will be stored at 895,  
this will be stored at 383, and so on. The point  is just that the indices are unique, so that we  
don’t end up overwriting one of the values  in the lookup table with a different value.   Of course we can only guarantee this  unique mapping because we know all  
of our data ahead of time, meaning we can  literally just keep trying different magic   numbers until we find one that works. However, finding a single magic number  
that works well for all 64 squares the rook  could be on is not really possible, so we can  
simplify the task by just having a separate magic  number and array for each of the 64 squares.  
Okay, so here’s what running the brute-force  search for the magic numbers looks like,   and as you might notice, I’m also generating  magic numbers for a look up table of bishop moves,  
which works exactly the same way as the rook. Now, we can see up here that the rook’s look up  
table is around 2 megabytes in size, but that  will get smaller if we let it run for longer,  
because it will gradually stumble across  better magic numbers that allow the data   to be packed into smaller arrays. So after letting this run for a while,  
I simply saved the result to a file, and  then pasted that into these arrays here.  
Then in the move generator, we can just quickly  update our code here to calculate the lookup   index using the appropriate magic number and  shift value… and then this rookMovesLookup  
is now a 2-dimensional array instead of a  dictionary. It’d probably be a good idea   to flatten it into one dimension actually,  but I’ll worry about that another time.  
Just out of curiosity, I made a quick test  to roughly measure the lookup speed of the   dictionary we were using, versus our custom  approach. So accessing the dictionary is taking…  
762 milliseconds — that’s for many millions of  lookups of course. And then doing the same number  
of lookups with our magic bitboard approach takes…  just 53 milliseconds. So that’s nice to see.  
Testing and Optimizing Move Generation
Alright, so all the sliding pieces are  now using the magic bitboard approach,   and by sliding pieces I mean the rooks,  bishops and queens. I have updated the  
pawn moves to use bitboards as well, although  that just requires shifting some bits around,   there’re no ‘magic lookups’ involved there. I haven’t actually fully tested the pawn’s  
move generation yet — but I’m  pretty confident it works…   Okay never mind, apparently  it’s completely broken.  
It turns out what I missed is that pawns now  have a new sneak-attack, where they can warp   around the edge of the board and capture enemy  pieces on the other side. A pretty cool feature  
if you ask me, makes more sense than en-passant  at least, but I will sadly have to remove it.  
Okay, so let’s take a look  at how much we’ve managed   to actually improve the speed of  the move generation in total.  
Running this full test suite originally took  around 22 seconds to complete. And this old  
version used a list to store moves, so something I  tried while I was testing all this bitboard stuff,  
is simply changing that to a fixed-size array,  initialized with the maximum number of legal moves  
in any position, which from a quick internet  search appears to be this rather outlandish,   but technically possible position,  where white has 218 legal moves.  
This change took running the test  from 22 seconds, down to 18.  
I then read some advice online about creating  the move array using the ‘stackalloc’ expression,  
to avoid having the garbage collector  poking its nose into our affairs.   [https://tearth.dev/posts/performance-of-chess-engines-written-in-csharp-part-1]   This does make things a little clunky, because  instead of simply asking for the moves,  
and receiving them — nice and elegant — we now  first have to allocate some memory on the stack,  
and then give that to the move generator to  store the moves in. The move generator will  
also then slice off the unused space — because on  average there’re about 31 legal moves in a chess  
position, not 218 — so that ultimately  we end up with just the actual moves.  
I don’t really love this code, so I was a  bit upset to see the test time go from 18   seconds down to around 15 and a half. I guess  I’ll just have to learn to live with it.  
Anyway, the final thing of course was  implementing all that magic bitboard stuff,   and that has brought the time down  again to around 9 and a half seconds.  
Let’s find out now if this faster move generation  actually translates to playing any better!  
So against the previous version, it has  scored 447 wins to 275 losses which is not  
too bad — and against version 1, we’re  now getting 792 wins to 89 losses.  
Honestly we probably could have made bigger  improvements focusing all this time on other   areas, but I feel like I learned quite a lot  from the process, so I can’t complain too much.  
Killers, Reductions, and Repetitions
Anyway, let’s just try a few more  quick things before we call it a day.   One thing I’ve been tinkering with is  the order that moves are searched in.  
For example, captures used to be ranked purely  by the difference in the value of the pieces   involved, so we’d consider capturing a queen with  a pawn, before we’d consider capturing a pawn with  
a queen, which makes sense. But now I’m also using  this bitboard of ‘squares that the enemy attacks’,  
which is created for detecting checks during  move generation, to make a reasonable guess   about whether the opponent can recapture the  piece on the next move — and obviously if they’re  
not able to, then that’s generally preferable. Another thing I’ve been experimenting with here  
is a technique called ‘killer moves’. The idea is  that inside of the search, whenever we encounter  
a move that’s so good that it causes us to reject  the current line of the search, we record it as a  
‘killer’ move. And so for the rest of the search,  even though we’re not looking at the exact same   position anymore, if it’s still possible to play  the killer move we’ll give it a high rank, because  
there’s a chance that it’s still really good. Just as a slightly simplified example — in this  
position, if white plays bishop takes bishop,  black’s best response is Qd1, checkmate.  
If instead, white captures the bishop with the  knight, black’s best move is still checkmate.  
And if instead white captures the  bishop with the queen… well you get   the picture — qd1 is a very good move  in many variations of this position,  
so by giving it priority in the search, we  can more quickly reject white’s bad moves,   and hopefully find something that  actually does defend against the threat.  
Okay, let’s how this does. So against the  previous version we have 477 wins to 221  
losses, pretty good! And against version 1  we’re now scoring 851 wins to 51 losses.  
Another technique that ties into what we’ve been  doing, is something called Late Move Reductions.  
The idea is that, if our little move  ordering scheme is working well,   then the best move should be among the first few  moves that we search — at least most of the time.  
So once we’ve finished with the those first  few moves, we’re going to search the remaining   moves at a shallower depth, because we  assume they’re probably not very good.  
However, if the evaluation turns out to be  better than everything we’ve looked at so far,   then we will have to search that move again at  the full depth to get a more reliable evaluation.  
Hopefully though, those repeated searches will  be infrequent enough to still speed things up   overall. And, hopefully, that increased speed  will outweigh the danger of the reduced search  
mistakenly thinking that a good move is bad,  just because it couldn’t see far enough ahead.  
That’s a lot of hoping, so  let’s see if it works out!   Against the previous version we are getting  397 wins to 238 losses — which I’m happy  
to see — and against version 1, we’re  now up to 873 wins to just 26 losses.  
Now I’ve been idly watching some of these  test games as they whizz past, and I happened   to notice something a bit concerning. Every now and again the program would  
be completely winning, but instead of making  progress, it would decide to just shuffle back   and forth until the game ended in a draw. After a painful amount of debugging,  
I finally realized this is probably because I’m  only testing for repetitions against positions  
that have actually occurred in the game, whereas  I should also include positions that occur inside  
of the search. So I’ve just made a very crude  little repetition table that handles that.  
I’ve then tested it against version  1 to see if that fixes the issue,   and it at least seems to be helping a lot, because  we’re now getting 898 wins to 27 losses, with the  
number of draws coming down from 101 to just 75. I would really like to beat the original version  
100% of the time, but I’m going to leave that  goal for the future because I’m beginning to   see chess pieces in my dreams at this point. But first, I do want to get this little bot  
Creating a Lichess Bot
running on lichess, so we can get  an estimate of how good it is.   To begin with, we need to convert our chess  program which is running inside of the Unity  
game engine, to a simple console application.  I’m only really using Unity for rendering these  
cutting-edge graphics we have going here, so  converting is as simple as just taking this   folder of Core scripts, and dragging it into into  a visual studio project, and then just deleting  
the occasional “UnityEngine.Debug.Log”  sprinkled throughout the files.  
Now, in this main function we’ll just keep  looping until a quit command is received   from the console, and simply forward any  other console messages to the engine.  
I’ve then written a very crude  and incomplete implementation   of the Universal Chess Interface, which is a  protocol for communicating with chess engines.  
So the communication between us and lichess is  going to go something like this. Lichess will  
say “uci”, and we’ll respond uciok. Lichess will  say ucinewgame, followed by isready. And we’ll  
say “readyok”. Then lichess will tell us to set  up the start position, and give the go command,  
followed by the amount of time remaining  for white and black in milliseconds.   We’ll then figure out what move  we want to make, and respond with  
this notation — simply the square we want to move  from, followed by the square we want to move to.  
Once the opponent has responded, lichess will  send a new position command, and give us a list  
of the moves played in the game so far. Then,  another go command with the updated times;  
to which we’ll respond with the next  move we want to make, and so on it goes.  
So, let’s now create a lichess account  to play on — and I think I’ll simply   call it the… CodingAdventureBot “I agree that I will at no time  
receive assistance from a chess computer”…. Okay,  but what if I am a chess computer? Checkmate.  
Alright, I’ve generated an authorization  token so that we can interact with the API,   and I’ll then just run a little command to tell  it to upgrade our account to a bot account.  
If we visit the website now, we can see  there’s a cute little robot icon over here,   and also a big BOT label next to our name,  so everyone knows that we’re not human.  
Now our little robot’s actually not  going to be talking to lichess directly,   but rather I’m going to use this super helpful  python repository to act as our go-between.  
So after downloading that, all we need to do is  drag the compiled chess program into the engines  
folder, and then open the config file… And in  there we just put our super secret access token,  
and specify the path to the chess engine. We can also customize all sorts of settings,  
such as whether our bot can play  variants like antichess, atomic,   and so on. Which it sadly can’t, although  that might be fun to add at some point.  
Then, just for the first few days I think I’ll  restrict the time controls to bullet and blitz   games only, just so that it can hopefully  get a chance to play lots of different  
opponents. That means that the slowest  time control would be something like 5   minutes per side, with a 4 second increment. I’ll also turn off matches against other bots  
for the moment, because I’m most interested  in seeing how it fares against humans.   So, if everything’s been set everything up  correctly, we should be able to fire it up  
by just launching the lichess-bot python  script… and it looks like we’re live!   Now our bot can’t actually challenge humans,  that’d be really annoying for them, so I’m  
going to post about it online, and hopefully  some people will be in the mood to play.   In the meantime, I’d like to  try playing a game myself.  
Let’s Play!
Just for fun, I’m going to put our bot’s  evaluation of the current position up on   the screen, along with the (obviously far more  accurate) evaluation of stockfish. Now being  
able to see what stockfish thinks the best  move is might influence me a little, so I’ve   engineered a high-tech solution — allowing you to  see what it thinks, while keeping me in the dark.  
Okay, let’s get this game started! We’re  playing ten minutes per side with no increment.  
I’m going try being very aggressive — usually  not a wise strategy against computers,  
but I think the weakest part of the engine  is still how it evaluates king safety… which   is to say not at all. So I think it  makes some sense to just throw all our  
pawns at the king… and hope something happens. In hindsight I probably should have prioritised  
working on that aspect of the evaluation, but I  got so side-tracked with all the bitboard stuff..   so I may need to subject you all to a chess  part3 in the future. Apologies in advance.  
Alright, I think I’m going to castle queenside  here. I like that our rook lands opposite the   queen, which should gain us some time…  And then let’s continue storming up with  
the pawns — uh what is… what is this? So if we  take the hanging knight, there’s knight check,  
and then wherever we move the king.. is  going to be checkmate. That’s devious.  
So let’s… let’s do this instead. Okay knight  takes… Uhh. aren’t we winning a piece? Because  
if we take with the pawn, then… the knight is….  pinned by the rook … oh no there’s — there’s  
queen check here to get out of it. So queen  takes instead, then if knight check here  
we can take with the queen… to protect the  rook so we don’t get mated. And… in the case  
of the other check. Uh, we have bishop takes  protecting the rook. So this should be fine.  
Okay the queen’s now attacking the other rook,  so… I’d like to move the bishop out of the   way. It can only really go here, but then if the  pawn attacks it we’ll have to retreat, and then  
knight check is… not going to be a good time.  So I guess we need to move the rook instead.  
Alright, we need to rescue it again, and I  assume the pawn’s going to protect the knight,   and also uncover an attack on our  queen. So let’s save her as well.  
And I think we better take this, because  we’re kind of running out of safe squares   to even put the queen at this point. I am a little worried about this pawn  
here — but we can maybe pin it to the  queen with the bishop and try hunt it down…   Actually don’t do that because of this!  So let’s first take, then… rook here.  
The pawn’s going to go one forward. And  then let’s finally bring the bishop out.   Okay so black’s attacking this pawn… I’m thinking  maybe counter-attacking the bishop, and then if  
the rook defends we can take this pawn because  the bishop is… well I was going to say it’s  
pinned but actually there’s check here so scratch  that. Maybe we just move the pawn one up then.  
I want to get back to charging these pawns  up the board, I feel like our plans were   derailed somewhat. But I think we can  resume our attack — hold on I’m about  
to blunder this bishop check again… Okay  but now our attack is officially back on.  
This is suddenly starting to look really  promising actually. Black does have the   annoying passed pawn, but the king is very  exposed. Like maybe we bring the bishop out here,  
and then we can start checking with the rook.  I feel like good things are going to happen.  
Okay now I’m very tempted to bring the  rook up here. There is queen check,   king here, queen takes. Uh… what  if we just keep running though,  
so king here… This seems pretty dangerous, but  also kind of interesting. I’m going to try it.  
That’s an annoying move I failed  to consider — stopping all our   checks! . But what if queen here. If the pawn  pushes, which feels like black’s main threat,  
this is just mate in two. So black would maybe  need to respond by dropping the queen back.  
Something like this might be good then, but  time’s running low, we’ve gotta go fast!  
Oh I’d kind of forgot about my king already.  So pawn takes, queen check, king here,  
queen check… This is getting confusing. If  we run up immediately with the king instead…  
no, there’s no way we’re surviving that. I think  we have to take. Queen check. Now we have to go  
here. Oh and that sequence removed the defender  of our bishop. That’s unfortunately very smart.   Okay, but queen here threatens mate on  g8… and if the queen takes the bishop,  
then we have mate on g7. But the rook can just  take the bishop instead so the queen defends  
g7 — I guess we have to check. Oh no…   We probably have to sacrifice the rook… Although  there is still bishop here threatening mate at  
least. Okay we’re going to get checked a million  times. Going to have to come hide on the other   side of the board. There goes the bishop!  But let’s see if we can give some checks at  
least. No we’re the one getting checked of  course. I’m really regretting my choices.  
Okay, good game computer. Last time we played I  felt like I still had an edge over the engine,  
Existential Crisis
but it definitely seems better than me  now, which I have… mixed feelings about.  
The Bot’s First Game Online
Anyway, we have had some activity in  the console in the meanwhile — so it   looks like someone took up the challenge  online. Let’s see if they’ve had any luck.  
Our bot played white in this first game,   and it looks like it managed to build  a slight advantage out of the opening,  
before losing it all by choosing the wrong  direction to castle, according to stockfish.  
Now we have an endgame that’s slightly  worse for white, on account of black’s   control over the open file, and these weak  double pawns I guess aren’t helping either.  
Black slipped up a little here though, in trying  to put pressure on this pawn, because white can   simply defend it, and now the rook is actually  stuck in this little cubbyhole. The king urgently  
needs to come around to defend the rook from b3,  but a few moves later and it’s too late. Defending  
from this square is not going to work, because the  bot is able to swing the rook around the back to   chase the king away, leaving the rook undefended,  and a few moves later, we have checkmate.  
So thank you to the opponent for playing,  and while we’re waiting for some more games,   I’m curious to see how the bot fares in a  match against stockfish itself. So I ran  
Can Our Bot Beat Stockfish? (No)
a match for 100 games, the result of which was  unsurprisingly: 0 wins, 0 draws, and 100 losses.  
Okay, we’re getting crushed, so  let’s get our revenge by taking   out the fish’s queen. In a one  hundred game match, with no queen,  
stockfish was actually still able to  win twice, which is a little scary.   I’ll give the queen back though, and for our last  test, let’s take away just a single rook instead.  
Aand the result this time is…  31 wins, 8 draws, and 61 losses.  
So if there’s one thing our little creation  isn’t lacking, it’s room for improvement.  
Anyway, over the last few days it’s played  270 games online — although only a fraction  
Rating Speculation
of those have been ranked games, so the  ratings are still extremely uncertain.   Right now though, it’s just under 2300 at blitz,  which is roughly what I would have estimated,  
so I’m very curious to see whether it remains  in that range, or changes dramatically.  
For anyone unfamiliar with lichess ratings,  a rough reference is that a total beginner is   around 600, the average player is around 1500, and  the best humans in the world are just above 3000.  
So I’ll be keeping an eye on the blitz rating,  and as for bullet, that is all the way up at 2600.  
My guess is that that’s a bit higher than  it deserves, because I have had the dubious   pleasure of being obliterated in bullet by  players at that rating, and that feels far  
more hopeless than playing against the bot. For example, here’s a bullet game I played  
against it where I sacrificed a rook to destroy  the pawn cover around it’s king. The bot is pretty  
pleased with its position at this point, since  it has an extra piece, but to human eyes, and   fish eyes of course, white’s vulnerable king  is much more important than the extra rook busy  
doing absolutely nothing in the corner here. So, I think that players better than me could  
probably exploit this king safety obliviousness  to win a lot of the games quite quickly.   I ended up missing a painfully  obvious mate in 2 and lost the game.  
Of course, if the bot doesn’t appreciate  the safety of its own king, it also can’t   properly judge attacks on the enemy king. So  here’s an interesting game it played online,  
where back-to-back-to-back blunders left it  with a very good position. But now, instead of  
realising how this knight, in combination with  the bishop, and threats of the pawn promoting,   or the rook swooping in, have the white king  in a serious pickle, it decided to just grab  
this pawn with the knight, and then wander off  on some sort of side-quest to harass the rook.  
White was then able to launch a swift  counter-attack against black’s king,   and ultimately trap it in a  perpetual check to rescue the game.  
So I feel like this bullet rating  might go down a bit with time,   maybe to around 2450 is my prediction. Anyway, if you’d like to play the bot yourself,  
I’ll leave a link to its page, and you can  simply click the little swords to send a   challenge, or the little tv to watch  if anyone else is currently playing.  
In any case, I will leave you  with this little game between   the coding adventure bot, and stockfish 15. I hope you’ve enjoyed following along with  
Outro
this journey, and I’d love to hear if you have  any ideas for things I should try in the future.   Alright, thanks for watching,  and until next time, cheers.