Hey, what's up guys? My name is A.
Welcome back to my code review series. A
series in which you guys send me your
projects and I take a look at them.
Goodbye edition. If you don't know why,
it's because I made a goodbye video, but
I'm still here. Sorry. Today we have
Bennett sending in a C++ chess engine
using walnut for [music] rendering.
Thank you for all the hard work you
haven't continued put into creating
highquality education content about C++.
In high school last year, I decided I
wanted to learn C++. So, I started
working on a chess engine. I actually
think that's quite a good project idea.
a chess engine [music] that kind of
involves everything that like a game
would, but there's a lot of algorithms
that you can really dive into. So, I
think it's really good actually for
learning C++. The thing with these
algorithms and the thing with C++ I
think specifically because it encourages
a much more lower level way of
programming, the way that you implement
a certain algorithm can be done from
like a scale of 1 to 10. Like you could
do a very naive, low performing
solution. You could do something a
little bit better. Maybe the memory is
just ordered better and the access is a
lot more thought about. But then you
could go like the next level deeper and
even do something like SIMD. So the
range of ways that you could implement
an algorithm and especially the types of
algorithms that you would find in chess
engines is just like this whole range of
levels. So I'm definitely interested to
see if there's some cool stuff that's
been done here considering this can
generate 40 million moves per second.
[music] I don't know if that's high. It
sounds high in the move generator and
can destroy me. I'm pretty bad though. I
mean, you'd expect a chess [music]
engine to destroy you probably. This was
one of my first projects in C++. I know
you don't like fixing people's broken
builds code, so I've made sure it
compiles good and runs out of the box on
both my desktop and laptop, which use
two different GPU manufacturers. I
[music] mean, it's chess. Like, I know
it's walnut, and you know, I made
walnuts, so there's probably like lots
of GPU compatibility issues there, but
you would think that rendering a
chessboard is something that's [music]
totally achievable. I'd love any
feedback or roasting you may have of the
code I wrote. I even put images and
build instructions and read me. Yeah,
see this right here. This right here is
where it's at. Okay, cool. So, we have a
link to the repository. I'll leave this
in the description below for you guys to
check out as well. And I mean, look at
that beautiful, beautiful porn. That
sounded a bit sus. Chess engine and GI
written in C++ 20. We got this like
center aligned links over here like a
menu. This is like a website inside of
readme. Man, either this guy went hard
or this is AI. It's hard to tell these
days. Okay, so we got this chessboard
rendering here. We've got some iMui UI
which looks like the walnut/hazel theme.
We got a bunch of features. Oh, there is
SIMD evaluation using SC intrinsics.
Cool. Transposition table with hashing.
This is like a lot of stuff that if you
guys are interested in you can look up
because these are sort of more or less
chess specific. I mean or chess like
game specific uh algorithms and and ways
to do things. All of this looks pretty
standard. Really good that there's an
actual getting started with
prerequisites and building. This is
really important to have in pretty much
any GitHub repository where you have a
project that you want other people to be
able to, you know, actually have a look
at. Click or drag pieces to move. Okay,
cool. So, we'll just play we'll just
play chess. That that's the that's the
plan for today's video. We're just going
to play a game of chess cuz we like have
to test this, right? So, yeah. In fact,
while we're on the topic of testing, one
thing that is coming to mind here is are
there any tests? Uh because no like unit
tests or any form of testing at all has
been mentioned. And the thing with chess
and all of these algorithms is they like
really do need testing because if there
are subtle issues with them then that's
going to screw everything up. So because
this does use Walnut and Walnut does
have like a headless build. I wonder if
there are any attempts to use that to
just like run tests basically. I have
kind of a lovehate relationship with
unit tests. I mean, it's mostly hate,
but that's because I work on game
engines, and game engines like don't I
mean, a lot of areas of game engines do
work well with unit test, but game
engines as a whole don't really lend
themselves well to unit test. I mean, a
lot of areas and a lot of specific
systems of game engines do definitely,
but game engines as a whole need a much
deeper and different usually custom
testing strategy. But when you have
specific areas like this, which is like
the core, the heart of how all of this
works, like that really does need that.
And I think Walnut's kind of a nice
choice because you just have this easy
headless build and you could just deploy
lots of various different creative ways
to test this. So we'll have a look to
see if the code uh has any consideration
for that and maybe maybe it is set up
for that kind of stuff. We'll have a
look. Now if you're sitting here being
like cool, this is written in C++ 20,
but it would be even better if it was
written in Rust. Leave a comment below
if that's you. And if that is you or you
think it could be you, you should check
out Let's Get Rusty, the sponsor of this
video, and learn Rust. If you're a C++
developer, you've probably heard of
Rust. And if you're like me, you've
probably been putting off giving it a go
and learning it. Well, that could end
today because Let's Get Rusty focuses
specifically on Rust education and job
ready training. It's also made by a
fellow YouTuber who has this YouTube
channel all about Rust. Rust is in a
really interesting space. It's got all
of this low-level control and
performance that you're probably used to
if you're coming from a language like C
or C++, but with modern tooling with
strong safety guarantees and built-in
support for fearless concurrency. That
combination is exactly why companies
like Google, Microsoft, and Amazon are
adopting it more and more in production.
It also keeps topping Stack Overflow's
most admired language year after year.
Let's get Rusty runs structured programs
for individuals and teams, and they've
helped thousands of developers over the
years actually get productive with
[music] Rust. not just watch tutorials
and forget everything a week later. And
here's the good news. They're actually
running a new cohort next month and
spots are limited, so now is a really
good time to check it out. Go to let's
getrusty.com/startwith
channel. Link will be in description
below to find out more about their
training. Huge thank you to let's
getrusty for sponsoring this video. One
more thing I want to mention about this
raid me by the way is uh I I called
someone out before for having one of
these because I was like there is no way
a human did this and there's no way that
a human really needs to do this. So,
this is now kind of raising the bar of
AI suspicion. I don't know like if this
is really that necessary to include in a
readme. I mean, it clearly doesn't scale
well because as you start adding more
files, are you always updating this?
Every time you add a new file, you're
like popping it in here. I mean, look,
there are like there are so many things
here like bindings.cpp. I guess that
doesn't have a header file, so maybe
it's not here because it's not public or
something. Perf.h,
it's not here. Serial communication.h,
H. I don't know what that is, by the
way. It sounds scary. That's not here
either. So, this is what I mean. Like, I
don't know. Sounds silly, but what do
you guys think of this? All right,
whatever. I don't have time for this.
Let's get into the code. So, here we
have the engine checked out because they
said they were so certain that it would
just build and run. I actually want to
test this live. Now, inside vendor bin
pre-make Windows, there is an executable
binary, which I have replaced with my
own because I'm not taking any chances.
that I believe is the only executable
file that actually shipped with this. So
now that I have my own pre-make, let's
go ahead and have a look quickly at what
this batch file does. Vulcan SDK. Okay,
that's that's bold. I've never seen
anyone download and install Vulcan SDK
in a batch file. I mean, I guess why
not, but like I don't know. I'd probably
use I mean, they're not using CMake, so
they can't use all of that stuff, but
I'd probably use like Python or
something a bit more serious for that.
And then we run pre-make. Okay, well I
do have Vulcan SDK. So, if I run this,
then hopefully it will just work. Wow,
that was really quick. I feel like that
finished before the actual command
prompt window finished opening. Okay.
And then we have a solution file. So, I
mean, this part seemed to work, which is
good. Going to go ahead and drag in the
output window. Get rid of this. And then
we'll do a release. Oh, there's even a
disc. Yeah, that'll be from Walnut.
We'll just do a a release build and
we'll see if this works. Okay, that did
in fact succeed. Let's go ahead and run
it. All right. Awesome. Oh, this is
cool. So, it's using like the
non-decorated window. Let's go ahead and
minimize everything so that this looks
nice and pretty. And then I guess we can
just play. So, there there's a time
limit of 1 second for for the AI to
think. So, do we just click and drag?
This is cool. It brings us up the little
preview. Do I have to press this? Oh, AI
color black. Okay, cool. So, I guess we
just play a game of chess to test this.
Resizing works. I'm getting more
distracted by with actually playing with
the app, but resizing works. That's
nice. Nice. Like I as it makes the board
bigger and everything looks very crisp.
So that's nice. I'm guessing you can
just drag out these panels as well cuz
it's all just like I'm gooey and walnut.
Okay, I must confess I haven't played
chess in a while. So probably should
Okay, I think I have to take and we're
going to lose our queens. Oh, he didn't
take my queen. Protecting his queen.
Okay, let's just castle. Guess that
works. That's nice. Okay, cool. So game
definitely works. Really nice. I think
the only thing that I found that was
missing was just [snorts] the pieces
that have been captured. But other than
that, I think pretty cool. And there's
obviously no sort of game over or
checkmate indicator. So that would be
good or a check indicator for that
matter. Okay. So first of all, as we
dive into this code, I'm trying to find
the So we have game.h, but we don't have
a game CP. I'm wondering where the entry
point is. Let's have a look at this
file. So we have a game layer. So that's
got to get added to Yeah, everything's
implemented inside the header file,
which is a bit weird. There's a lot of
commented out code as well. But why is
there no game CPP? That is interesting.
But anyway, game layer has got to get
added. So in gambit app, did I see
gambit app? Yeah, gambit app of course
that that would be the main. So what
happens with walnut is that there is an
entry point over here the guess
included. So you can see in the entry
point header file which is what this is.
We basically end up with either this win
main or this normal standard main
depending on uh if it's like a
distributed windows app that doesn't
have a console then it would land here
otherwise it would just be the normal
C++ main. So that gets included here and
then create application is ultimately
what would get called from here. So this
is the main function you can see that's
being called from here that creates the
application that immediately runs some
win32 API code. Right? So this is from
windows.h and will not work on any other
platform. So that's another thing that I
should have mentioned was I'm always
interested when I get code to see if
this would work on different platforms
and at this point obviously not which is
fine like it's okay to make something
specifically for Windows or for a
specific platform but if you are trying
to write better code then what I would
do is make sure that anything that is
platform specific is in its own sort of
platform specific CPP files or at least
behind some sort of if if defaf kind of
like we do actually over here in walnut.
I mean, we do this because we also want
to make sure we don't do it for headless
and only for disc builds, but you can
see that like if defined WL platform
Windows. So, it's really not hard to add
that to this. Like, you could literally
just do something like that. Now,
technically speaking, you probably want
to have potentially the equivalent for
other platforms. I don't really know
what that would be. And so in that case,
you would have some sort of set process
DPI awareness or whatever function
inside your actual API that would then
potentially be implemented in a
different file or in a series of
different files that only get compiled
for the platforms they are meant to be
compiled on that avoids polluting this
create application function with all
this random stuff that we don't really
care about. Okay, so this is just some
walnut app specification initialization
stuff. This is where we actually push
that main layer which is our game layer.
Look, there is an if defined headless
and then we just do this UCI loop,
right? So, this is where that whole UCI
thing comes in. UCI, by the way, in this
case is the universal chess interface
and it just lets us write stuff like
this. So, it's sort of like a a command
line interface we'll say. So, that must
be what's being tested over here. But
since you are clearly aware of headless
and by the way there there is like a WL
headless define already for walnut
headless. But since you are aware of
headless, this would be a really good
opportunity to actually test some
things. Speaking of which, game layer
has a whole bunch of stuff in it that I
can see is not really uh UI specific. So
all of these like move generators,
bitboards. Okay, cool. So yeah, we
looked at a chess engine a while ago was
doing a similar thing. So this is quite
a popular thing to do. But anyway, all
of this stuff that is clearly very
calculation oriented. This is like the
actual brain of what's going on is tied
directly into game layer. So I wouldn't
do it that way. Game layer is a walnut
layer which is a way to control what
your application actually does and it's
also a way to control the UI and render
everything. But the core issue here is
that the way that the game is actually
played is all sort of within here.
Here's also another Win32 thing. Serial
handle. So serial I really wonder what
that was for. We'll we'll check that out
in a minute. So, the way that I would
structure this, I mean, first and
foremost, I would definitely make that
game.cpp file, but anyway, the way that
I would structure this is in a way where
the AI isn't just sort of intertwined
with the logic of what's actually being
calculated and what's happening. So, I
would just clearly separate the chess
engine part of this and the UI rendering
part of this. Now, speaking of which
though, I'm sure that all of the chess
engine stuff is not being calculated on
the main thread, especially cuz I can
see the word async in various places.
So, we have this async AI search result.
Searcher async result. So, I'm guessing
this is going to search for different
moves. So, here's the best move and
here's whether or not it was completed.
And there it is. Find best move async.
So, where is this called from? So, we
call this from game.h. So, AI turn. So,
when it's the AI's turn, I'm guessing.
And then there's a true or false for
color. Okay. So I would also make this
like a little enum or something so that
there's not just like bull color because
what on earth is like what color is
black? What color is white? I'm assuming
black is false which you know because
like black is zero in color and white is
one. So if it's white turns and is white
AI then yes AI turn true otherwise AI
turn false. Yeah, like again it would
just make more sense if it was like
black or white instead of true and
false. Especially because there's no
like obviously there's no runtime
difference. It's just for developers to
be able to see. I would definitely drop
this onto another line as well. We've
got this lurp timer. Is this like what
is this for? Animation length. So see
this is what I mean like inside us
trying to figure out an AI move. We are
also like calculating the best move but
then also doing animation stuff. So this
is this is what I mean that should be
separated and then play move will yeah
just do board make move which will
update the board state game history.
Okay, there's a game history as well.
Yeah, we saw those like arrows I guess
that let you move throughout the game's
history which is cool. And then yeah,
here is the async. So we I'm guessing
this cuz it it's checking for whether or
not the async AI search result is
completed. So I'm guessing we just run
this like every frame. Yeah, it's inside
on update. So basically, if it's white's
turn, for example, and the white is the
AI is just going to keep going through
this AI turn again and again. Sorry, I'm
just fixing all this code with my
opinion. So we're just going through
this again and again, and we're
basically just waiting for that AI to
have completed its searching for the
best move calculation. Then we grab that
best move, which okay, we have some
force inline stuff. Again, MSVC
specific. This stuff should be if you
really want to force inline. Do people
still do that these days? I to be honest
I'm not 100% sure but anyway I would
just make a macro that you know is this
on Windows and whatever else on other
compilers and other platforms I guess
not specifically Windows it's just
specifically MSVC okay and then we have
a move being all this stuff sure okay so
we find the best move and then we reset
the move okay so there's some like it's
a shared pointer I guess and there is
some communication between threads here
but I think I guess it' probably be okay
because we're waiting until this is
completed before we do anything with it.
And I'm assuming we can't kick off or
we're not kicking off another move that
might write into here until that's done.
Yeah, I think a lot of this is kind of
gray area stuff because for example,
we're pushing the board state by
reference and then we're copying from it
on this job thread. Now, would it be
modified by the main thread? Well,
probably not. I mean, the player is not
really going to make moves while the AI
is thinking, and that's also something
that we could just not allow regardless.
If that was the case, then that would be
a little bit dodgy because it's like we
have our board state over here and then
we have this job thread that's kind of
reading from it at the same time as some
other thread might be writing to it and
we have this weird condition where it's
not atomic, it's not locked, it's not
copied, it's not double buffered. So
that's technically wrong. However, if
you sort of orchestrate these rules how
it's like okay but I'm not going to do
that, then technically it's okay. But in
my experience in the long term like code
is code and you might a year down the
track decide to introduce some feature
where oh actually I can now do this and
you don't really remember these rules
that you've set for yourself as to how
we should be synchronizing this data
access because it's not there's nothing
in the actual code that's preventing you
or making sure that you do it the
correct way. And I'm just using this as
an example because this I mean yeah this
is one of those things where it's like
okay why are we running this on a
different thread? Because we don't want
to block the UI. We still want to keep
updating the UI. Why do we want to keep
updating the UI? It's probably not 100%
necessary. But what if like the user
wants to go through the history of
moves, right? We might give the computer
some more time to think than 1 second
and maybe we we still want to keep our
UI responsive. We don't want to just
completely freeze the main thread, but
we know that nothing else is going to be
happening in the actual game board. No
one's going to be moving all these chest
pieces. So therefore, it's not really
concurrent, is it? Because even though
we have this job thread over here, let's
just say, and then we have the main
thread over here, what's happening is
that the main thread is modifying the
board, right? Because we've made some
sort of move. And this, by the way, is
time kind of going forward. So we're
going to be modifying the board because
we made a move. And then the AI is going
to be, so this is me. This is the AI.
The AI is going to be modifying the
board, right? And that's not going to
happen at the same time. And then when
the AI is done, I'm going to be
modifying the board. So even though we
have this like situation where this is
in fact happening on two different
threads, there's no way that this could
like move up into this territory where
suddenly like, okay, yeah, that's bad.
We're doing this at the same time and no
one's kind of controlling the access to
that. So it is still done in serial.
It's not done concurrently. However, it
is two different threads. So, yeah, this
is something that I call a gray area.
And my gut feeling is always to be like,
okay, but we do have these two threads.
So, let me just synchronize that. Let me
just make sure that I'm copying the data
or double buffering and I have something
in place that makes sure that there's no
possible race conditions or anything
that could go wrong here. Honestly
though, I'm interested in what you guys
think. So, leave a comment below if you
have any opinions on this. But this is
definitely the kinds of things that you
should be thinking about when you're
working with stuff like this. Okay,
since we're in this search file, let's
have a look. So, we have search logs
which is just turned on, right? Okay.
So, this is something that we probably
shouldn't just have persistently on.
Usually with logging and you know
writing all this stuff to to files, you
probably want to maybe use that for
development but not for distribution. I
don't know, I might be wrong. Like you
might want to keep logs for
distribution. That's also totally fine.
a lot of logging is required but maybe
not as much logging or something because
obviously logging is also a performance
consideration. So this this is something
that I probably would not just
arbitrarily define you know in this
header file but rather I'd have it as
like maybe configuration dependent or
some sort of level of it would be
allowed in like debug and release but
maybe not distribution main thread
running store false. So this is an
atomic bull. So we are specifically
setting this to false searcher. I'm
guessing this is mostly this is all
running on the main thread except for
that one thing that creates a job.
Actually, we were looking at that job
stuff. Let me just have a look. So, this
pushes it. This locks the mutex and
pushes it to this job Q. So, I'm
wondering where that actually gets
consumed. So, main thread search
function. So, while searcher main thread
running. So, this is the searches main
thread.
Why is it I don't really understand what
thread this is running on. Okay. So if
you guys are like me like I just said
and you don't understand what threads
what what thread something is running on
then all you have to do is put a
breakpoint in here. Hopefully this will
compile because I seem to have made a
modification and you can see that it is
in fact not running on the main thread.
So we have this like UCRTbased
DLL thread by the way. Really good idea
to just name your threads. I would
highly recommend you do that. But
another thing you can do is debug
windows and parallel stacks which is
over here. So if you open this window
let's make some more room here. So, this
is a really nice window that I should
probably make a video about because it's
great. This shows you all of the running
threads that you have. So, ignore
there's like some external stuff running
as well, but ignore that stuff. These
are the two main threads that we have at
the moment. So, we have the main thread,
which you can see this is our actual
main function. It came through here. And
at the moment, it's initializing the
log. And then we have this searcher main
search thread function, which is just
doing this as well. So, if we just run
this for a bit and let's do let's set
this to black again. And then let's do
that. And then let's actually just make
it play its own game. And then I'm going
to hit the pause button up here. And
then we can have a look back at parallel
stacks to see what's going on. And you
can see we have a whole bunch of
different threads here. A lot of them
are completely irrelevant. But if we
have a look at the ones we've got. So
we've got some searcher. This is our
code clearly that's going on over here.
So we can see that we can see there's
some condition variables that are being
waited for from this main search thread
function as well. Here's our main
function. So yeah, parallel stacks can
definitely be very useful for trying to
make sense of what exactly is going on.
So this is in fact running on a separate
thread. I'm guessing we'll find that
over here as well. This is probably a
fairly good use case for a lock free Q.
So feel free to investigate that as
well. Definitely not a big deal, just
something that might interest you. And
so we're basically waiting for this Q
condition that's going to get signaled
as soon as we actually push something
onto the Q. So this is kind of cool as
well. And then once we do receive that
signal, so we're basically just sleeping
this thread until we actually get some
data, some sort of job to take care of.
And then we grab that job and we run it
on this thread, which is pretty cool. I
think that's definitely a fine and
pretty straightforward system. So this Q
condition variable, which we're waiting
for on this search thread function, only
gets notified once here. I can't find
any other notifies. And so what could
happen when this gets shut down? I don't
really like we could just be waiting. We
could just be waiting on this thread to
be notified and that notification never
comes. And so this kind of just hangs.
So I think on shutdown we probably
should just do like a notify all or
something to make sure that this gets
unlocked because otherwise we'll just be
waiting. We'll just be waiting and
that's kind of it. That's a bit bit sad.
And by the way, again, why is this in a
header file? Why is this not in a CPP
file? It's just so weird. Like what was
your rationale for putting some of this
stuff into CPP files and some of this
not like just in header files? Very very
interesting. Okay, here's some nice
juicy numbers. These are just some
random numbers apparently that I guess
are probably part of this zobrist hash
thing. So, zorobris hashing or zobrist
hashing is a hash function used to
implement transposition tables which can
be indexed by board positions and used
to avoid analyzing the same position
more than once. This serial
communication header is really quite
interesting. I wonder if this was like
meant to yeah hook up to some hardware
or something, but it's never used. It's
only used inside here, but it's
commented out. And then write data as
well is in commented out blocks. We've
got some bonus tables for each piece
inside evaluation.h as well as a lot of
SIMD stuff as well. So, this takes in
the bitboard and a table. I wonder how
this is used. Yeah, right. Okay. So,
it's just going to compute the sum of
all of the bonuses that we get for each
piece. And that of course is used to
evaluate how good a specific position
is. Cool. Overall, um yeah, really nice
project. It's that range that I was
talking about, those like levels of
like, you know, there's so much room
here to grow, I guess, as an engineer or
just to try out some cool things like
the SIMD to sum up the bonuses that
we're doing over here. Various different
ways to implement all of this search
stuff and multi-threading. I think it's
a really cool problem to solve making a
chess engine. It definitely touches like
a lot of different aspects of
programming, C++, and computer science
in general. In summary, in terms of
actual code, I would just say I mean
number one, stop implementing everything
in header files. I don't know why that's
being done. Put stuff into CPP files,
otherwise you have to recompile
everything. And also, it just keeps it
more organized. I would also separate
out the way that the main game runs from
this game layer so it's not as tied to
UI. And speaking of which, this is a
really good opportunity to run some
tests, maybe in like a headless
configuration, so that you can actually
make sure that all of these advanced
algorithms and computational things
actually run correctly. I think doing
stuff on this level of like
computational and algorithmic [music]
complexity without having unit tests to
make sure that stuff works is [music]
just madness. And finally, uh the
threading. Yeah, the threading uh is
generally okay, but I think that maybe
you could be a little bit more explicit
about how certain things are done and
that how how that data is sort of shared
between threads and maybe have a few
more safe guards [music]
in place. If you guys enjoy this video,
please don't forget to hit the like
button. Let me know your thoughts on
this project as well in the comments
section below. If you want me to take a
look at your project, send it in to
churnerreview@gmail.com. That email
address and some instructions will be in
the description below. Thank you all for
watching. Don't forget to check out
Let's Get Rusty in the description
below. And I will see you next time.
Goodbye.