Hey, what's up guys? My name is China. Welcome back to my code review series. A series in which you guys send me your suspicious projects and I take a look at
them. Today we are doing something a little bit different because I saw this email come in. Game made in Hazel for
Lam Dare and I just couldn't resist. So this comes from Nef. Hi Chenno, longtime follower here. So I recently
participated in Lam Dare 57 which was like a couple months ago I think. But I wanted to make things interesting. I was
fed up with Unity. GDAU is good, but not really for me. And I won't even entertain the idea of using Unreal. Feel like Unreal is the best option of those
three, but okay. So, I wanted to make it in a more experimental underdog engine. Is that a compliment? I don't know. And
what better one than Hazel. No complaints from me. At least if things get tricky, I can move to Unity pretty easily. Uh, I thought he was going to
say, "At least if things get tricky, I can ask you for help." So, I made this game called The Fall. I have zero art skills and I was a bit busy with work,
so I'll admit this is not my best work. Strong start, but I thought it might be fun to see how someone uses your own
engine. Yes, the engine version is 2024.1 stable in case you end up running into issues with a dev version. PS, I
tried to add sound, but I couldn't find any videos explaining the sound graph and it just didn't work for me. And then here's a source code. Okay, so pretty
exciting. Um, I don't think I've ever code reviewed a game that was made in Hazel, not by the team. So, I have
technically done a Hazel game code review because like a few years ago, Tim, who was still on the team back
then, made this Space Invaders clone. And so we had this like hour-ong really chill code review where I just went over
everything with him actually in the video and basically told him my thoughts. However, one of you guys making a game in Hazel is not something
I've ever reviewed. So I am pretty excited to take a look at what on earth this is. So for those of you who don't
know, Hazel is a game engine that I've been working on for the last few years. And recently I made a video announcing that is going to be free, completely
free to use very soon. Even though it hasn't officially been released just yet, you can still sign up on
patreon.com/thecherno and get access to all of the source code, all of the development repository, all of that stuff, and actually start using it
immediately, which is what this person here has done. I have been getting a lot of requests from you guys to actually make videos showing how to make games in
Hazel. But I'm more or less waiting until that free full stable version gets released because first of all that's
obviously going to greatly increase the target audience size for those videos. But then we're also getting to a place
where Hazel will be a lot more stable, a lot more usable and I'm not going to have these obsolete videos, these
outdated videos on the channel that I'm going to have to update and remake anyway with the new version. So if you
do have access to Hazel and I will leave a link to this repository in description below in case you want to check it out. Again, 2024.1 was the version of the
engine that Nef has said he is using. So, that's what I've got over here, checked out, ready to go. Without
further ado, let's dive into the repository and take a look at what we have here. So, first of all, a couple things I'm noticing just by looking at
this repository is there is no readme. Again, I say this pretty much every single time that there is no readme.
There should be a readme that just even shows like a screenshot of this. I mean, presentation's really important, but
also maybe some build instructions, just like some information about the game, like just really simple stuff. just have
some information about what this project even is in the first place, how to get it up and running and show it off in a screenshot. It would have been nice to
actually see the lumare submission page, assuming that was uh a thing, like assuming this person actually did submit
it as like a lot of them dare game. And also, was it built using the runtime or not? In which case, are there pre-built
binaries that I can just play or was that something that Nef didn't know how to do? Like, I don't know. But that's step one. Step two is resources scripts
intermediates. As the name implies, none of this stuff has to be committed. These are just intermediates. They're not even
um binaries or anything. So definitely don't commit this. And also I'm suspecting in assets and probably
scripts binaries and intermediates debug. These also can just be added to the git ignore along with this OBJ
directory which is also like intermediate. Source is like the only thing you need here. Oh, it looks like there's quite a bit of source here.
That's nice. It's not just like cuz I don't know what to expect from this. This could be just like a really tiny game. We'll see. Lots of different
assets it seems. Is there stuff in like models and meshes? Yeah, it looks like looks like a decent amount of stuff. There's a bunch of FBXs and GLBs. So,
we'll have a look at this inside Hazel and see uh see what we can do. Now, as always, you guys can submit your project
in for review by emailing it to channel review@gmail.com. That email address and some instructions will be in description
below. However, if you can't get me to review your code, then you should get Code Rabbit rabbit, the sponsor of this video, to review your code instead. Code
Rabbit gives your code AIdriven contextual feedback no matter what language you're using. It integrates with GitHub and GitLab and scans your
pull requests in real time as they're coming in, showing you potential bugs, security issues, and helping you improve
your code in general. Now, my favorite way to use Code Rabbit is in VS Code using their extension. Code Rabbit can
also integrate with other IDEs such as Kurszer and Windsurf. This way, before we commit our code, we can actually get
Code Rabbit to do a code review over it and point out potential mistakes or just give us suggestions like any other
fellow engineer would do in a real code review. So to give you a little bit of an example of what code rabbit is capable of, check this out. One of the
potential issues that has picked up is that we have this duplicate operator over here when this define is enabled
and it's able to track that down because this specific define which used to just be in a CPP file is now defined globally
in pre-make 5.la. So it's actually looked at the pre-make scripts, the build scripts, and seen that that's now
defined there. And as a result, we may end up with a multiple definition or redefinition error depending on what
kind of modules we actually built this code in. And I think that's really cool. Just the fact that it's able to look at
your project as a whole and see things like this makes it so much more powerful and useful. And the best part is that
Code Rabbit is completely free for open- source projects. Or if you have private repositories, you can give it a go with
a 14-day free trial. Just go to codabrabbit.ai. Link will be in the description below. Huge thank you to Codrabbit for sponsoring this video.
Okay, so Hazelnut, which is the editor, I'm going to build in release. That's all I'm going to do. And again, this is
2024.1, not like the current up-to-ate dev repository, which is not expected to probably work with any of this stuff.
Over here on disk, I've checked out the repository. We have this the full solution file. So, I'm going to open that as well. And this is the H project
file. This is like the Hazel project file that we now need to load inside Hazel. So, let's just not show that again. So, file, open project. We'll go
to this path and we will open up the fall.h. And hopefully this opens. There we go. We've got something. Ooh, this is
interesting. I haven't I haven't looked at this project before, so we're going to have to take a look. And hopefully it's going to be straightforward cuz I don't know, everyone sets up their games
a little bit differently. Obviously, Hazel's a very flexible engine as well. So, it's going to be interesting to see um how this is put together. Space to
play. Got a bunch of entities over here. All right. And then we got obviously the solution file. So, debug release doesn't really matter for these C# scripts. I'm
just going to build these. And there we go. Everything's built. Pas will actually build build these scripts for you, but I just wanted to make sure that
everything compiles. And then we've got all of the files over here. So I'm guessing the first thing I should do is probably try and play the game. I have
no idea how to actually play it. So if we hit play and then I guess we press space to play. Guess we'll fade into
something. And then we're this we're falling. Okay. I think I'm controlling the leaf or is that supposed to be
supposed to be wind? Okay. So I can light fades from us. Press space to
replay. So I think W and uh sorry A and D. key. So, like the WSD keys, but I
don't know if W and S does anything. No. So, A and D looks like it moves the leaf. I guess I don't know what my
objective is at all. It would be really good to have some instructions on like how to actually play this game and you know what the objective is and what the
controls are. Are those all the controls? Uh, I can't see where I'm going anymore. Is that because I didn't pick up enough light? I'm guessing I'm
supposed to pick up the light. Light fades from us all. So, where So, do I lose if I run out of light? And I guess these are the light things that I can
Okay, and then that's just like fading over time, is it? So, I'm trying to pick up these lights. Okay, that makes me brighter. No way I can get there with
the wind. There's no light for me to pick up. Oh, here we go. Oh. Oh, but if I hit that, do I lose? Okay, I'm going
to quickly have a look at the source code because this doesn't really do a good job of explaining how to play the game. So, let's have a look at um I'm
just going to do a search for input and see. Uh oh, space does something. What is the space? Oh, that's for the main
menu. Okay. A and D. Yes. Oh, look. There's a if input is mouse button
pressed mouse button right trigger the dash. Okay. in the relative direction of the mouse. So you can dash with the
right mouse button. Okay. And then how do I see this is a bit ridiculous obviously the fact that I have to like
look through the source code to figure out how to play. But what what I am interested in as well is um how I lose.
So I'm guessing game manager. Let's have a look. This the code is actually pretty clean so far. Like I'm you know
terminate game. So game over equals true. Uh m license. So when does this get uh there's one reference to this in
here and that's if distance to player between what the player and the this
obstacle object is less than the detection radius then we end the game.
Oh, detect if we hit the player. So I'm not allowed to hit obstacles apparently. Maybe that that was the issue. Okay,
let's try Oh, whoops. Doesn't matter. Let's try play again and then I'm going to uh I guess I can dash. Oh, there's
that's a dash with the right mouse button. So, if I hit that, I lose. Yeah. Okay. So, I can't hit obstacles. I don't
think light matters at all. It's just that obviously I can't see if there's uh Oh, no. I'm definitely going to lose.
Oh, I don't think uh yeah, I don't think light matters. I think I just can't see obviously if there's no light. So,
therefore, how am I going to dodge the obstacles? For example, here. Why is there no light more light spawning? I
really have to pick it up. Maybe it stops spawning if you miss it. And it looks like with the dash, I didn't actually hit anything there, I don't think. What are the Can I see the
physics colliders? Let me I'm going to go to the viewport settings up here and actually show uh all the physics
colliders. Okay, so that's the leaf collider. And there's all these um I wonder if they're just I don't know what
they are. I want to see if the colliders are like super big or something for that's got a sphere collider on it. I can't even really see that. Never mind.
Okay, whatever. That's the game. We're a falling leaf. We collect light. We There's wind and there's this particle
system, I guess. and uh you're just trying to survive, I guess, for as long as possible. But there's no score or anything. So, fairly primitive game, of
course. Uh not too much going on here. Definitely could be refined a lot more. But hey, it's made in Hazel, so I can't really be too harsh on it now, can I? Um
we got this like very interesting looking uh what is this very interesting looking um main menu setup. And I guess
it's like these are trees or something and then we kind of jump in the tunnel or whatever and then we're falling into the thing. So, that's interesting. So,
we I'm guessing we got two scenes over here. Here, if we have a look at the scenes, we've got the menu, and then we've got main. So, if we look at the main scene, this is the main scene.
Okay, so this is what it looks like. So, we've got the leaf, we've got a light, we've got this, and then I'm guessing these like walls. There's only two walls
here. I'm not sure why it's not highlighting them like to show what's selected cuz it shows the leaf, but this
wall, it's not highlighting the mesh. I don't know if that's because it's like really big or that's very interesting.
Weird. Okay. And then this environment tray, whatever that is, has a bunch of lower bounds and upper bounds. That
could just be, let me just show. So with the physics um colliders, I can also show just the selected entity. So that
might help if we actually want to see if they have bounds. But oh, here's well walls. Ah, these walls are different. I
guess they're also kind of at the origin, though. Ah, they're these ones. Oh, hang on. Static M. Oh, it's not
visible. I'm a clown. It's not visible. So, I guess this is just being used as like a collider, but it's got a box
collider on it. So, this is a bit you don't need this static mesh here at all. I mean, it's not going to render, so it's not using up too much performance,
but still having this is a bit redundant because if you were using it as a mesh collider, then obviously that would kind
of make sense, but you don't actually need the static mesh component for that because if you use a mesh collider in Hazel, then you can just um usually you
can specify um which mesh you want to act as a collider. But maybe not though cuz no meshes are coming up here which
makes me think that it's a different uh asset type. But anyway, obviously yeah, static mesh is just like for rendering
and then box collider. If you have a box collider, then you don't need the static mesh on it. Now, if you have a collider with no rigid body, it's going to be a
static rigid body by default when it gets like when the scene actually starts. But otherwise, if you want to override parameters, then you can also
add a rigid body and configure things such as like what physics layer you want it to be on and stuff like that. Okay,
so that's what that's what those walls are. Uh, and then environment. Uh, well walls. Whale walls are these things. Um,
and then we've got like these wall segments which I'm guessing kind of the script will probably either move them down or spawn more or do something as we
uh drift down. Now for the actual player. So it's got a box collider on it. It looks like it's got a dynamic
rigger body. So it's using Hazel's physics system uh as you probably would expect to um make it fall downwards.
We've got some uh what does this look like? Mass one. Yeah. So like I don't know. Obviously this is very subjective.
You can tweak physics parameters however you like. This is basically like in kilog. So 1 kilogram is a little bit
heavy for the leaf. So if you want it to be a bit more floaty, maybe you could um make it weigh less. So when you're
making physics for a game, especially a very abstract arcadey game like this, it's not really like the goal isn't to
make it like a simulation necessarily. It's just whatever feels good and whatever is good for gameplay effectively. So it doesn't really matter
like that this weighs 1 kilogram. If you kind of control your forces in such a way that that feels good to you, then it
these numbers don't really matter. They're just numbers. What you're trying to do is obviously create like a good
feel and and that takes a lot of time and a lot of expertise and a lot of like
testing to get right. And that's obviously very difficult to do in a game jam. So that's why a lot of game jam games end up not feeling very polished
because that polish stage can take a significant amount of time and you know in a professional game studio you you'd
get so many different people to come in try and play it and be like oh this feels floaty or this feels too rigid or
too slow or doesn't accelerate fast enough. There's so much feedback and there's so much iteration that can
happen for the way the gameplay feels cuz it's such a it's like the most important thing probably one of the most
important things especially like for the main character, you know, which is this leaf. Refining how that feels can just
take so much time. So yeah, very very difficult to do in a game jam unless you kind of know what you're doing already.
Like meaning that like you've you've been through it before. you are making a character that you in in an engine that
you're familiar with and you know like oh these parameters work really well or this is a good baseline this is a good template to start from then I can kind
of tweak and refine as I go okay cool so anyway I think we've looked enough at the actual structure of the game within
Hazel I think the code is probably uh what more people are interested in so let me just close everything over here
and then we're going to start by looking at we could by the way look at if we look at um what was like this leaf for
example so you can see that this has a script component And a script component in Hazel is how we actually tie an entity to a C# script and have that C#
script run. So you can see that in this case it's tied to leaf movement. That's the script class. And then leaf movement
is going to have these public variables inside the class. So if we have a look over here, that might be a good place to
start this leaf movement script which is its own file. Over here you can see it's going to it's got these three parameters
public float speed dash speed and dash duration. And those are all things we can set here. So, it's cool to see
people using Hazel more or less properly. Meaning that like uh because there's very little video tutorials or
like just educational content surrounding how to use Hazel. The best examples are probably me using Hazel or
the team using Hazel to make Latam Dare games. But a lot of those are like somewhat outdated as well. So, they're
probably not the most relevant to, you know, Hazel 2024.1, which is like the latest released kind of stable version.
So, that's why if you hear me say stuff like, "Oh, that that's not how you are supposed to do that or whatever." That's I'm not throwing shade at the author of
this like whatsoever. It's actually quite impressive to me that they're able to make something like this because
there's so little documentation as I mentioned out there that it's like how are people even supposed to learn how to use this engine, you know? Well, they're
not really at the moment. It's very experimental, very early stage at the moment. When it comes out, we're going to come out with like a lot of
documentation, you know, when it's free to use and everything. And that will like I'll make video tutorials. I'm sure other people might as well. So, it'll be
like a lot uh a lot more straightforward. So at this at this stage like I'm just impressed by the fact that oh cool we have like public
variables being used here. Not everything is just like hardcoded uh inside the actual C# script. Of course this is similar to how Unity does it. In
this case it works exactly the same way. In a way our goal with this is to try and make it as intuitive as possible.
And there's a lot that I like about Unity's workflow. I think that you know that way of kind of making games where
you've got like the editor working together with all the code and it's C and everything can I just like that. I
think it's a really powerful way uh to make games. So stuff like that I definitely am trying to keep. That's why
like a lot of the the API as well is quite similar you know between Hazel and Unity. Okay. So what we are looking at
here uh is just a pretty typical I would say game script. So this is an entity. This is a Hazel entity. And so because
of that it's going to have some methods here that we can override such as on update which will be called every frame.
On physics update is even being used here which is cool. that's going to be called on every physics update which is
which can be independent to the frame rate and then we typically also have like on create which is up here and then
there's on destroy and there's a bunch of functions really if you go to the entity class if you have no idea how to use hazel you can always look at the
like existing code so if you go to the entity class then you'll see uh somewhere like over here we have a bunch of these functions that are all virtual
that you can override if you wish to to have them called at uh certain uh times and then there's also like these events
these actions that you can hook into if you want to be notified like for example when there's a collision between two
entities. So that's kind of all listed uh over here. All right. So when we create the sleeve, uh this is all pretty
standard stuff. This is being used a lot. I guess this is just intentionally a stylistic thing. Obviously, it's not
required. I personally never write this unless it's required, which when you're referencing stuff within this class,
like it's it's not required unless you have a conflicting name. So obviously if I have a local variable called a and
then I also have a variable up here called a and I want to refer to the one up here then I have to use this a. So
you'd have to do something like this in order to actually specify which variable you want to refer to because they're
both called a. If you don't have naming conflicts, which you shouldn't, especially if you're using this m underscore convention, which further
defeats the purpose of having this qualifier out here, then obviously you don't need to do that, and you can just write your code like this. Especially
weird is uh using it in front of functions. So, because there's not nothing else this could possibly refer
to. Uh so, that's a little bit strange. Get components actually on the base class anyway inside entity. That's like
the first weird thing that um I'm noticing. There's even an a set here, which is kind of cool. So we're just making sure that we I guess we have a
rigid body component. One other thing you can do is use the has component function if you want. That way you could do it kind of more or less runtime.
Asserts are also runtime but they're not really like recoverable from whereas if you just wanted to have like a bunch of validation checks at the front of this
for example then I would probably just assert has component rigid body component. Okay. So just setting up stuff over here inside on update. If
it's game over we return. So I like to drop these down here as well. So this is all uh pretty straightforward logic.
Good to see time step being used as well. A lot of people seem to have uh issues when it comes to timing or being
like I don't want to say aware of time, but a lot of the times in your game, see what I did there? A lot of times in your game, a lot of the time in your game,
you want to tie things that happen in the game like logic to real world time units. So in other words, I want this to
take 2 seconds or I want this to be 5 milliseconds. Timing is something that lots of game engines and APIs try to
cleverly maybe even use things like co- routines or like uh you know lambdas or
whatever it might be to notify you and try and chain like events together into timings. So like for example uh in Unity
you know we have like invoke and then you can actually pass that in with a time. So you can invoke actually it takes in a method name by string which
is weird but anyway we can invoke like this launch projectile after 2 seconds of like real world time. So, it's
delaying like that function call effectively by a given amount of time. There's lots of different creative ways to to solve this. Hazel doesn't have too
much built into the actual like C# scripting API. Of course, you can build your own tools because it's C. So,
whatever you might want to use, whatever libraries you even want to hook in, you can do all of that, which is great. It's more or less up to the game maybe to to
add all of that complex functionality. Although, we probably will try and provide obviously as much as reasonably possible to make stuff easy. um if
you're working on like sandbox and like small projects and you don't want to have to you know hook in all so much extra third party code or do a lot of
writing yourself. However, all you really need to know with timing is that you have this glorious time step
parameter which is like your delta time. So it's how much time in seconds has passed since the last frame. And so
because of that, it's really really easy to for example set the dash cooldown to
well in this case I guess it's being set to 0.5 seconds right because all the time units here are seconds. So if you
want milliseconds you have to multiply it by a th00and but we know that the dash cool down is 0.5 seconds. So
therefore if we have our current dash timer and we just subtract time step from it like we are doing here for
example if we set it to 0.5 and we subtract time step every frame then no matter how long that frame takes because
each frame can take a different amount of time and in fact it will usually we know that we're decrementing that timer
by how much real world time has actually passed. And that's effectively all you need to know because if you want to
count upwards for example you're just going to add that time step. If you want to subtract because you have a timer
that starts at like 2 seconds and you need to be aware of when it reaches zero then you can do something like this
where you just subtract it for example every frame well in this case is subtracting it if it's greater than zero
but the way that I generally do this is you could have something like - cooldown time minus equals ts and then if that
cooldown time is less than or equal to zero so you've basically hit zero it's possible that you went a little bit over
because obviously this is not like this is usually something like 16 milliseconds but obviously expressed in seconds we're not calling this every
like nanocond. So obviously you might be a couple milliseconds over or something. If it does hit zero then you can
basically do your action and then like for example reset it back up. So dash cool down time could be reset to that
dash cooldown parameter which is going to take it back up and then you can do your dash for example. Obviously that
would also be tied to input in this case but that's basically the general idea. So it's nice to see uh this being used
over here. This is my preferred way of handling things like this. In a more complex, refined game that obviously
isn't made as part of a game jam or just has a more extended API or library, you
could have a system that does this for you so that you can you don't have to actually keep track of all these timers.
Because the downside with this is if you have like a hundred things that rely on timers to happen, then obviously you're
just going to keep adding these floats and like the current timer, the you know reset time or whatever. your on update
function is going to be like you know 100 lines long cuz you're doing all of these timers one by one. When it gets to
that stage we are software engineers. So we start to think about hey what if we had a system what if we had like a
dedicated system where data goes in data comes out that actually handles that transformation of like these seconds
being decremented or whatever and then we could maybe ask for the parameter that we're looking for or even have call backs and get notified when certain
timers go off. Like that's where the engineering comes into it. But at its core, that's this is as simple as it
really is. And obviously for a game jam, we're trying to keep things as simple, as manageable as possible because
otherwise we're kind of wasting time potentially designing and implementing these systems, which, you know, even
though they might sound simple, they're probably also going to need like some testing, some design time. We might change our minds. We might realize, oh,
this doesn't actually work with this game. We don't want to be dealing with all of that stuff if we are fairly sure
that it's going to take less time for us to simply write something primitive like that. So that's actually one of the reasons why I really like game jams. And
you know I used to love not using engines at all. In fact I've most game jams that I've done in my life up until
Hazel started getting more or less mature and ready to make games. Like all of those were basically from scratch. Like I would use not like completely
from scratch but I would use some framework or I would never use like an actual engine. I used to use Java a lot and just um you know not even like
OpenGL or anything but just Java and the include a Java library and render pixels to the screen. Very very primitive
stuff. And even though that meant that I had to basically write a little bit of an engine, a little bit of infrastructure, a little bit of a system
to get the main things up and running, it was that like from scratch primitive way of doing things that I think taught
me a lot and also was just really fun to to use because then you get back to your real projects that are not game engine
games and those are obviously much more complicated in the long term. So, it's nice to just kind of go down to this
primitive level, keeps things simple and actually try and focus as much as possible on the actual gameplay and the
logic and getting all of that working. I think the idea and and all of that is kind of, you know, I mean, I was going
to say that's the purpose of the game jam, but I think that every time I do a game jam, I usually have a goal like I
want to refine this system in Hazel or something or I want to test out this new technology or I want to try and
implement this. like the goal for you doing a game jam can obviously be whatever you want it to be. And I think
there are obviously so many like viable goals or so many things that a game jam
can really help you actually test out and prototype. But anyway, I guess in conclusion, my point is just that uh
this kind of primitive way of doing things is uh is nice and I like to see that uh in game jam games. I guess I'll
also point out that it that's not to say that you shouldn't use a game engine or anything for a game jam because for example, if you want to make a 3D game
or if you have this vision of like I want the game to look like this, then there's a big chance that you're going to need a lot of technology to make that
happen. And by using a game engine, whatever it may be, you know, Hazel in this case, you have all those tools
already available and you can focus on making the actual game itself because you have such a small amount of time
anyway, that you only really barely have enough time probably to spend your all of your time on this one idea and
getting that and making that actually happen. Then if you had to also build a 3D game engine on the side, then you're
not going to actually get to doing the thing that you want to do. So, of course, use whatever you want, but when
it comes time to getting scripts to actually like do what they need to do, it's nice to see like no overengineering
being done in this case. Okay. So, uh on physics update, so we're doing um mouse
stuff here, which I guess is fine. Then we're calling this move. We've either got move or dash. And then move is going
to just add force. So, we're just adding like normal forces here, which is pretty standard. There's different types of
forces uh that we have available to us as well. says impulse, velocity, change in acceleration for well and of course
force which is the default one. So it just depends how I guess urgent you want to be with your force. So for normal
movement uh it's probably okay to just use normal forces. If you don't specify a parameter then it's going to be um
force by default that's just going to take a little bit longer to kick in which it's going to give you that like
natural acceleration that you might want from here. dash I would probably expect to just have an impulse force but
interestingly what it's doing instead here is actually setting the linear velocity immediately to this so that
kicks in like that obviously because it's like suddenly the leaf's velocity has been increased you know I don't know
if that's I I'm not a huge gameplay programmer but I don't know if that's uh the best thing to do and interestingly
it's happening here as well we're adding force over here and we're also clamping um linear velocity to max velocity so
one thing that we have inside the physics system actually is the ability to set a max velocity. So you can see
that we have a max linear and angular velocity. So you can actually just set that to what you want and not worry about the clamping. So that's probably
something I would do over here. The problem with setting velocities directly is that sometimes this can bypass
physics that this used to be a big problem with NVIDIA physics. So back when Hazel used physics, we had a lot of
issues uh when we tried to control like things like velocity ourselves because it would basically get it into a state
where it would that velocity would bring it into being intersecting like with another physics object and then we'd get
stuck in it or something like that. I don't know if Jolt, which is the physics engine that we currently use in Hazel, if that's the same going to have the
same consequence, but generally I would avoid, you know, setting velocities directly and instead use the add force
function either with an impulse force if you want it to take effect a lot quicker. Um, there's also velocity changed, by the way. So, like if we go
back to where we add force, then you can see that there's a force mode called velocity change, which ignores the
object mass basically and just immediately like gives us a velocity change as as it implies. But at least
this way it's taking into account the current situation of the object and all of that. So I just assume that would be
a little bit safer. But again, I don't think I've done exact tests like this with Jolt. So that would be interesting
to experiment with. Okay. And then for handle input, we just set moving direction over here. And I'm guessing that's something that we then end up
taking effect inside the move function from on physics update. Cool. Okay. So let's have a look at some of these other
classes. cuz I'm expecting a lot of them are obviously going to be called from like various entities that we might have
here. So like environment tray, whatever that means exactly has this script class called environment tray and then it's
got a bunch of stuff. So this is actually a really good example I think this environment tray of uh you know how I like to use scripting. Okay, well not
quite, but uh it's it's along the same lines. This is like a really good example of how I like to tie in C
scripting with an actual visual editor. you know when you're making a game and that is you want to lean into the fact that the editor provides you like this
visual 3D scene that you can actually design. So for example we need like an upper bound and a lower bound. We could
try and just define that by just values by numbers in code or we could create an empty entity. So by empty entity I just
mean that we have this entity called lower bounds which has nothing in it except for its transform. Every entity has a transform and it's in this case
it's actually parented to environment tray but that doesn't really matter too much. we have lower bounds and you can see it has values in it. But the
difference is that even this object which doesn't have a mesh, doesn't have any kind of box collider, it's just this. It's a point really in 3D space.
We have it in 3D space. So it's like over here. Usually one thing I might do is add like a debug mesh to it just so
we can see it inside the editor, but whatever. We can see it by its gizmo. It's over here and then upper bounds is all the way up there. So by having these
empty entities and just like being able to obviously you know drag them around move them to wherever they need to move
to just by having these uh you know 3D points basically and being able to visually define them you know inside the
editor is a huge help. And then obviously you can see these upper bounds and lower bounds entities they've basically been you know dragged in like
this over here and then we can access that entity from within this environment tray script class. So if we go and find
environment tray, you can see we have these two entities, upper bound and lower bound, and then we're able to actually use their translation in the
code. So that's a really nice synergy between the editor and the scripts, the
behavior, the logic for the game. Another great example, which I thought was happening here, is things like box colliders. You know, if we wanted to
have like a spawn region for something like let's just say we had those forces. Actually, I wanted to have a look at how
those forces work because we had those um by forces, I just mean like the particles that were shooting out. Uh, I
suspect we'll find them a little bit later. Well, actually, here's wind particle system prefab. But for example, this is different cuz everything is
falling. So, it might be a little bit difficult to actually define like fixed locations. But if you had like a spawn
region, like this huge box which entities could spawn like within, you could define that by just having a box collider. That way, you can define it
visually inside the editor. And then when you're inside like your script, you can just reference that entity with its
box collider with its bounds and then use that as the spawn region instead of obviously having to like specify numbers
inside your code which very difficult to visualize. So try and lean into the visual aspect of the editor and tie that
into the code. That's generally uh what I think is just really really strong. Okay, so the other thing that this has by the way aside from obviously like a
float value entities, this is almost like a little Hazel demo. It's got everything. It's got prefabs um which is
cool because prefabs are basically entities or entity hierarchies even that we've created ahead of time. So you can
see there's quite a lot being used here and we can instantiate them dynamically at runtime using this script. So you can
see that for example we have these wind particle system prefabs and then when we have this spawn wind effects function
being called which I guess has a random one in 10 chance of actually not returning. So therefore spawning a
particle we can go ahead and call this instantiate function on the entity with that prefab which will actually spawn
the prefab at this position in wellspace in this case. And you can see it's even using the do as function to cast it
basically to a particle system. The reason why so yeah this is actually pretty cool. This is I would say a
fairly intermediate to advanced usage of Hazel which I didn't know was possible uh without basically being on the team
because of our lack of documentation and educational content. So I'm definitely impressed. But anyway, so we have like
this wind particle prefab. So if I just drag that over here, we can see it. Let me hide the physics collider. So that's what it is. I guess it's just like one
of these or something. Um, you can see that it's actually got a script attached to it. The script is called particle. So
that's why we're able to Oh, that's not it actually. So wind particle system prefab. I guess that's probably I think
this is just a single particle, but then we have Yeah, here it is. wind particle system, which doesn't have like a mesh
associated with it, but it does have this particle system script. So because this prefab actually has a particle
system script attached to it, it means that if we spawn it and we instantiate
it like this, we can use the as function to basically treat it as this particle system script which is an entity. So
we're basically just making sure that okay, we're going to immediately reference it as its existing class so
that we can then obviously access the functionality of that class and for example set like this callback to
destroy this specific instance of well this is just setting like a function. So the instance actually gets passed in by
the parameter over here. So this definitely didn't need to be created here. But anyway, we can start like this wind particle system, you know, right
from here. So this is pretty cool. Uh this is exactly, I guess, how I would do it in terms of like Hazel's API usage
and everything. I think that's good. And then this is like the actual particle system, I'm guessing, which uh isn't
itself an entity. And then on update, I think it will just animate the particles basically. Where are the actual
particles though? So when they get spawned like are they are they contained
within here? So we just have it looks like one particle here but how do we create multiple particles? So I guess
this is what happens. So when we do on update okay right so it's got some sort of duration that plays the particle
system which I guess just allows them to get created and then every single frame maybe cach these. Yeah. Where are they
going? that's uh potentially worrying. But anyway, every single frame we go through and we instantiate this many
particles and then they've actually got scripts attached to them on which we call in it. That's why when when I
dragged in just one of these particles, so he has one particle, it's also got a script attached to it um and a dynamic
rigid body and everything. So yeah, this is obviously not great for performance because where every single particle is an entity with a C script attached to it
and a dynamic rigid body. So definitely not the best. I don't know why it necessarily needs to have um rigid
bodies or C# scripts attached to it. So an individual particle I guess is responsible for uh basically controlling
itself. So I wouldn't really do it that way. The way that I've always done manual particle systems because Hazel
doesn't have a particle system at the moment, but it will probably have one in time for like our full free release I
was talking about. But because it doesn't have a particle system at the moment, it basically means that you could you have to implement one yourself
if you want particles inside like C for example. So that's usually what I end up doing pretty much every single lot dare
game that I make because particles are very useful to have. But usually what I do is I just have like a strct or something of particles that are stored
within a list inside like a particle system entity and they're the particles themselves are not entities. They're
just like little struscts of data that just have all the relevant data to it and then I get the actual C code to
basically render them or actually maybe the individual particles are entities but either way they don't have C#
scripts attached to them which need to be individually updated because that can be a huge slow point. What they are
usually, which works rather well, at least with with Hazel, is that there each individual particle is a prefab,
which can have things like, you know, a sprite renderer or a mesh renderer component on it. If you want like a 3D particle with like, you know, you slap
on a material, you visually dress it up to have it be good and have it be like what you want it to be. Then you make a
prefab out of it and then you can instantiate that prefab inside a particle manager script and then
maintain like the list of those instantiated prefabs inside that script. store them in like some kind of
container entity if you want. So they're all parented to that. And that way you can basically animate their position,
process, all of their behavior all within like a for loop inside your particle manager script. So they don't
individually need to have C# scripts that have like an on update function that gets called on them because that
can be uh you know pretty slow especially if you have like a thousand of them. But having like a thousand, even if they're 3D meshes, like just a
thousand instanced meshes that the engine has to go through in Hazel is not too bad, especially if it's not on the
screen like at all times. So that's an optimization that I would probably make. But again, what I usually do is I have like a little particle system uh C#
script that's ready to go like and then I can just slap that in, you know, I wrote it once, you know, I can just slap
it into any Hazel game that I make uh and then I know how to use it, you know, to create like some container entity for
it and some prefabs that I want to use with it. And then it gives me a bunch of parameters um that I might want like
scale, you know, animating over time like it is over here without having the need for each particle to be its own
like C# script because that can be slow or at least slower because obviously we didn't have any problems with it while
playing um on this computer. And this computer, by the way, this is my code review computer as you probably saw from the intro. So this is like I don't know
a Core i5. It's got a 3060 in it. This is not a very beefy computer by any means. All right. And then like a light
pickup. So, I'm assuming that like when we pick up stuff, we probably have a we must have some way to detect collision
with that. So, I'm wondering how that's implemented. Oh, okay. It looks like it's just done very easily. I guess that
that's fine. I would probably just do it using I guess the included functions just because that's even easier and
maybe a little bit cleaner because you have like those dedicated functions for it. But this is very very simple and probably faster. I mean, the physics
system knows when collisions happen anyway. Okay. So, it's I don't think it would be much greater cost at all to just like ping C#, you know, a call back
being like, "Hey, there's been a collision over here." However, what this does is it basically grabs the This is
the leaf. I think we're inside the light pickup. Okay. So, I'm guessing this is like the current light or something, but
this is coming from the player, right? So, this is the player's position and we're just measuring the distance
between two points. So, we have like the light over here and we have like the player over here and we're just like,
"Okay, what's the distance between these two?" And if it's less than this pickup radius, and obviously the light is a
circle, so it kind of uh means that you can just use the radius to that. If it's less than the radius, then we're just
like, okay, we've touched the light, we've picked it up. So that's the most simple way to do collision detection in all of like games and collision
detections is just basically two the collision of two circles because it's just like, okay, what's the center point
of the circle and then what's the radius? If those two are greater than like the other one or whatever, then we're colliding. That's what's happening
here. But I don't think the player even has a radius. We're just like the player is just a point in this example. So it's
just like a red point. The light has a point plus this radius in orange. And it's like, okay, if this red point
becomes somehow inside this like circle with its radius, then that's true. And then we do that. So very very simple and
definitely consistent with the game jam theme. Okay, cool. I mean, we've got some like static functions here which uh
could potentially be questionable. So what does this actually do? It just goes to game manager instance and it spawns
one of these light pickups. Okay. And then entity spawn tray is probably so game manager is quite quite a big class
as well that we didn't look at. But this is all pretty uh straightforward. I think it's just like logic. We got a lot of assets which is nice. Just making
sure that our state is what we expect it to be. Here we see some scenes being loaded. So we can load other scenes in
Hazel. This is just how we go between like the game scene and the main menu scene. We remove all the light entities
and everything. What happens on game over? Do we? Yeah. So, we do actually reload the game scene, interestingly,
right? So, we remove the lights immediately. So, remember this is still happening every frame. So, as soon as we've lost the game, we're in this game
over state, but we're still updating every single frame cuz it's not like the application has ended, right? And so,
we're just in this block. So, we remove uh I mean, we're trying to do this every frame, but I guess once it gets removed,
it's not going to do anything. It's only going to really run the first time. And then it sets all of this stuff up. And then it keeps doing this every frame.
But it's basically just waiting for us to either press escape or space. And as soon as we press one of the two, it's either going to reload the current scene
by just triggering a load of the game scene or it's going to load the main menu scene. Go back to the main menu. Um, and that's it. Okay. And then
there's also moving terrain, which I'm guessing Yeah. So, all this really does is just pushes the walls down based on
the falling speed every frame. And that's it. So, again, really simple. Just need to make sure the speeds match
up so that you don't end up not seeing the terrain or falling faster than it or something like that. But otherwise,
yeah, pretty simple. Pretty cool. So, I hope you guys enjoy this code review of a Hazel game. Something different here today. It's always really interesting
for me to hear your thoughts about what you thought it was like, you know, making a game in Hazel. We're trying to improve it and make it as intuitive, as
comfortable as possible for a wide variety of different developers to actually use Hazel for their purposes
and their needs. I haven't made too many videos like this just because again, Hazel isn't officially out in my eyes
yet and it's not free for like for everyone to use. So once that happens, I expect I'll probably make a lot more content surrounding it and things like
this. But it's also about the journey. So I thought that throwing something like this in would be uh hopefully quite enjoyable to you guys as well. As
always, if you want me to review your project, then send it into channel reviewgmail.com. That email address and some instructions will be in the
description below. Thank you all for watching. I will see you next time. Goodbye.