Let's make a game engine
again. So, you guys probably know I put
out a video called Let's Talk About AI.
We talked about how AI has completely
changed the way that software
engineering is done in 2026. And I think
that a lot of it is very good. A lot of
it is very bad. So, what's the deal?
Should you use it? Should you not use
it? How do you use it? All excellent
questions. It's a very controversial
topic and it's clear that a lot of
people are very unclear on what the deal
is with AI and software engineering.
That's where I come in. I have some
opinions to share. And what better way
to share these opinions and discuss this
topic of AI software engineering than
practically by making a game engine. And
most of you at least I think most of you
I haven't actually counted have said
that it is in fact a good idea and they
would love to see that. So today we're
going to talk about what exactly that
means. How am I going to make a game
engine using AI? How am I going to make
this into an educational YouTube series?
How is any of this going to work? And
I'm also going to be answering your
comments from the last video at the end.
First, we're going to talk about the
game engine stuff. Okay, so first of
all, you guys know the deal. I'm not a
full-time YouTuber anymore. I want to
make videos about things that I am
interested in, and this is genuinely
something I'm really interested in. Do I
know how it's going to go? No. That's
the fun of it. We're going to explore
this together and hopefully I have
enough experience 10 years actually much
more than that game engine experience
that is. I have hopefully enough
experience where yes we are going to be
using AI to build this game engine but
we can still build a good product
hopefully. So the goal is very simple.
Unlike my first game engine series which
I will have linked up there in case you
want to check it out. That was a wildly
different time. Unlike that series which
was quite deep and very slow paced and
very I guess narrowly scoped at least it
ended up just being a 2D game engine
rather than the initial goal of having
it be a 3D game engine because I
realized that it was just it was just
too much. It was too much to go through
every line of code that is put into a 3D
game engine to actually make it work
well. like the scope is just too big for
a video series in which every line of
code is written and thoroughly explained
in the actual video. I tried fairly
early on in that series to just merge
code in and go through diffs and look at
what that was like because that allowed
me to, for example, write an entire
event system and just go through the
diff, not go through every line of code,
certainly not write it out on camera and
actually explain the gist of this is
what the system does in one video. But
people didn't like that. People said,
"No, I like you writing code line by
line." And so we went back to that style
and everything just dragged on. And
taking all of that and making that into
like a 3D game engine would have just
been
just completely unfeasible. But at the
time, I still really wanted to make a 3D
game engine. So I did that off camera,
initially by myself. Then people started
volunteering. We formed together a
little team. I even hired some people.
We made Studio Cherno and we made Hazel.
The big version of Hazel. Hazel Dev as
it was initially called and then later
just became Hazel and the game engine
series became Hazel 2D. Obviously, I'm
glad that happened. That is now the
technology base for Lucky Robots and
we're building a robotics simulator. So,
overall, I would still call that a
successful project and obviously I
learned a lot by making a game engine
entirely by myself or at least directing
that team entirely by myself. And it
would have 100% been impossible to do
that where every line of code was
written in a video and explained as part
of an educational series. There is a lot
that goes into a game engine. You can
get away with keeping it quite simple in
a lot of cases, but nevertheless,
there's still a lot, especially if
you're writing it in C++ and you end up
writing a lot of low-level systems that
of course need to be properly written.
Now, speaking of low-level systems that
need to be properly written, Rust is
another great programming language for
that. And if you're looking to learn
Rust, check out Let's Get Rusty, the
sponsor of this video. If you're into
low-level programming or you're a C++
developer, you've probably heard of
Rust, the language that seeks to improve
it all. It's always good to learn a new
language because aside from the fact
that Rust is getting more and more
popular and people seem to love it. I
mean, it keeps topping Stack Overflow's
most admired language year after year.
Aside from all of that, learning a new
language just teaches you new concepts,
concepts that you may not have thought
about, concepts that you might even be
able to bring back to a language like
C++. So, basically what I'm saying is
there's no reason not to learn Rust. In
fact, I think it could be very
beneficial. And Let's Get Rusty is a
fantastic place to do that. Let's get
Rusty focuses specifically on Rust
education and job ready training. And
it's made by a fellow YouTuber with a
YouTube channel all about Rust. Rust
gives you all of this low-level control
and performance that you're probably
used to with a language like C or C++,
but in a more modern way with modern
tooling, with strong safety guarantees,
and with built-in support to make sure
that your threads are behaving and you
can write [music] concurrent code
confidently. All of this is exactly why
companies like Google, Microsoft, and
Amazon are adopting Rust more and more
in production. Let's Get Rusty runs
structured programs for individuals and
teams, and they've helped thousands of
developers over the years actually get
productive with Rust, not just watch
videos and forget everything. Go to
let's getrusty.com/startwithch.
Link will be in description below to
find out more about their training. Huge
thank you to let's getrusty for
sponsoring this video. Now, when it
comes to the complexity of game engines,
there are many different levels to that.
There's it's very different to write a
simple indie game engine than it would
be to write a full-on AAA game engine.
You could say I've worked with both
because I worked at EA on Frostbite, but
then I also wrote Hazel, which is very
much an indie game engine and quite a
simple one at that because I think that
people a lot of people just do not
understand the complexity that goes into
something that is AAA grade. It's
actually fundamentally impossible to
achieve that with a small team and from
scratch because a big portion of what
makes a AAA engine aa AAA engine and of
that kind of grade is the fact that it
has physically been around for like 20
years or more. That code base is mature.
What does that mean? That means that it
has been thoroughly battle tested. Lots
of games on millions of different
devices have shipped with specific code
and all of the edge cases, all of the
but what if this happens? This is like a
really weird race condition or bug or
edge case that could happen. All of that
has been covered. The code just the code
is mature enough to handle all of that.
If you make something yourself that of
course is not just a copy of you know
AAA engine game code, there's no way you
could have that. is just impossible. It
is just impossible. Of course, there are
lots of things that make a AAA game
engine aaa game engine, and we can
certainly discuss a lot of those
throughout the course of this series,
but the fact is that is obviously an
impossibly high standard to reach. Like
literally, it's impossible. Now, making
like a very simple indie game engine, I
think, is also a little bit boring
because I think personally, it's very
easy to make a simple game engine. You
just write the code however you like
really. And I mean, yes, you do need to
learn some math, I guess, to do 3D
graphics rendering. You need to be aware
of lots of different techniques. And if
you're doing it yourself, that might
mean reading some papers, reading some
books, probably looking at a lot of
sample code. But for the most part,
computers are fast enough, your GPU is
fast enough that if you're trying to
render like a simple 3D scene and make
an editor around that that allows you to
author the data that the runtime is then
going to use for your game, that's not
that difficult. I mean I mean yes I
realize this is me saying this and of I
if I didn't know what I know then maybe
it would be very difficult but I feel
like that's just not difficult at all.
And the reason I'm saying this is
because that's not the kind of series
that I want to make. So AAA is
impossible indie is easy. Let's settle
on something in the middle is my point.
I think it would be fun to make a game
engine that has some of these AAA game
engine concepts. Of course, in a more
simple, naive, narrow implementation and
in a way that demonstrates these more
advanced features and concepts that I
think are really cool to learn about,
but doesn't go too too deep to the point
where we are more just building core
systems and not actually producing a
game engine that's capable of making a
game. My hypothesis for this using AI to
build this and we will talk about what
that means exactly in a minute but my
hypothesis is this should be fairly
achievable in a rather short amount of
time. Now my time is limited and it's
not like I'll be making a video every
day. We'll see how quickly the ball
starts rolling and I start making all of
this stuff. But nevertheless, I think it
shouldn't be too difficult to build
something rather quickly that even has
these advanced concepts in mind. So that
is basically my plan. At least that is
the product that I'm trying to build. A
3D game engine that is still simple but
utilizes some more advanced AAA grade
concepts. Back when I made the game
engine series that was public on GitHub.
It was just open- source software. And
then when I started making the 3D
version of Hazel in my own time, that
was accessible to patrons who helped
support the series on Patreon. This new
game engine that we're going to be
building is just going to be 100% open
source and available on GitHub for free.
Of course, you can still access Hazel on
Patreon. That is like 7 years worth of
work pre- AI days. And to be honest,
it's a great point of reference for many
things. And if you do wish to support
this new game engine series, then my
Patreon will always be open for that.
And that will certainly help with
outsourcing the video editing, for
example, so that perhaps I'd be able to
produce more episodes more quickly. But
again, I'm making this for fun. I'm
making this because I want to. This is
just an experiment. I don't know how
this will go. So yes, of course the code
will be 100% free. Now the next
important thing that I want to talk
about is this concept of building with
AI. What do I mean by that? Am I just
going to be like make game engine and
that's it?
No. This is going to very much be AI
assisted development. So I am going to
use AI heavily for this. I want to push
it. I want to see how good it can be and
I want to show people how they can use
it to achieve a lot more than they
otherwise would be able to achieve. But
I'm also not 100% going to build this,
how I would build this if this was off
camera. So, to make this in an effort to
make this a bit more educational and
useful to beginners, I'm going to not
necessarily pretend that I'm a beginner
and just ask it all of these questions
and have it explain concepts to me,
which if I was a real beginner, I
wouldn't be able to validate anyway. I'm
not going to approach it from that angle
exactly, but I am going to try and
perhaps use it to actually learn more or
give me resources and and guidance more
so than I would if it was just me
confidently building something that in
my brain already makes sense and I just
need it to physically write the code and
implement, you know, these algorithms
and make the codebase. So, that's
something that I'm genuinely excited
about because I don't know how that's
going to go and I'm going to try and put
myself in the shoes of someone who has
less experience and see what kind of
product I can get out of this. But, of
course, Big Cherno will step in when
necessary and be like, "No, that's
wrong." You know, cut. Let's start
again. We're also going to have some fun
with this series. So sometimes I may let
AI do quite a lot and then code review
it and then see, okay, this was great,
this was not great, and point out to you
guys what that difference is, at least
in my opinion, of course. But there are
also going to be times where I work with
it to develop a strong architectural
document to plan things properly and
make sure that that architecture is
something that I actually want to see
realized in the code and then put it to
work actually implementing that stage by
stage, phase by phase, and make sure
that it's doing basically what I would
have done manually, but it's just doing
it for me. So, we're going to be quite
strict with it in a lot of cases. We're
also going to use it to develop tools
along the way that help us validate and
it to validate itself as well. So, there
are going to be lots of scripts. There's
going to be lots of testing. There's
going to be lots of documentation that
we write for the AI agent to actually
read before it does things. We're going
to make like a bunch of different tools
and skills, all of that stuff. We're
going to do this properly. It's still
ultimately going to look like code that
I would have written. It's not like
[clears throat] we're going to just let
it do its thing and then not even look
at the C++ code. We will read every line
of code that it writes and we will make
sure that it is written the way that
ultimately I would have written it I
guess for the most part at least and we
will also make sure that it follows our
code style our conventions that it
ultimately does things our way and looks
like code that we would have written and
by [clears throat] we I mean I because
I'm the one making the series of course
now as for which AI we will be using for
this series I'm going to start off using
Claude code that's the one that I have
had the most recent luck with, you might
say. I'm sure that we will probably end
up exploring other AIs as well
throughout the course of this series. We
might try Codeex. We might try GitHub
Copilot if they open that back up and we
can select various models there. I'm not
really sure. But we're going to start
off with Claude Code. I'm not sponsored
by Claude or Anthropic. I'm not
sponsored by any of these AI companies,
at least not yet. So, I don't really
care what we use. I'm just going to use
what I think is the best tool for the
job. So, that is the plan. We obviously
need a name for this new game engine.
So, leave your suggestion in the comment
section below. I will also think about
it. I have no idea as of right now what
we're going to call it. But, of course,
that is the hardest thing in
programming. So, we need to make sure we
get that sorted out. When will this
series start? I don't know. Maybe in a
month or so, probably pretty soon. I'm
going to think about how I want to do
things a bit more before we actually
start the series. But overall, I feel
like I'm pretty much ready to start. And
it will just be chill. It will be
casual. It's not like it's going to be
something that requires too much
preparation cuz again I don't have time
for that. And we're going to be in this
journey together. We're going to go
through a lot of this stuff together
anyway and decide these things together.
So it makes sense to just to just begin
and see what happens. But a name, we
need a name for this engine. So that
means that in the first official episode
of this, hopefully next month, we will
start by designing things and just
thinking a little bit about the goals,
the architecture, the types of systems
we might want to make. I'll still give a
normal overview. I want this to be
educational obviously to people trying
to build a game engine. So I will still
give a we might not even use AI next
next episode for episode one. I might
just draw some diagrams and talk about
okay what is the plan for this engine?
How are we going to architect it? What
kind of systems are we going to do? And
then we'll probably begin. It'll be just
like the OG game engine series.
Nostalgia. Okay. So that is pretty much
it. That is my plan. Leave your thoughts
in the comment section below. Let's read
some of your thoughts from the last
video. So over,300 comments. You guys
definitely commented a lot. I definitely
haven't read all of these. My wife
though, who loves reading my comments,
has uh let me know about some of them,
so thank you. But anyway, let's go
through some of these now, and maybe
that will help answer some of your
questions and my thoughts about AI as
well. So, there's a big difference
between reviewing code from a junior and
code from AI. The junior might actually
learn and improve longterm. Okay, I feel
like that's a bit irrelevant. Meanwhile,
the AI will not become better longterm
based on your feedback, which will only
live on in its memory. Yeah, but you're
not training. Okay, so in this case, I
guess this would imply that you're
trying to actively train AI to replace
the junior. You want the AI to be the
replacement for an actual junior
engineer. That's obviously not what I'm
talking about because in this case, in
this scenario, the junior would be using
AI. So the junior would be learning and
keeping everything. It would be the
thing that lives on in its memory
permanently and then the AI would just
be a tool that the junior uses to
implement the code. So in that sense,
the junior is still obviously learning a
lot, still getting feedback from senior
engineers, probably getting feedback
from AI as well because at that level of
experience, the AI would obviously know
a lot more than the junior would. But
the only thing is the junior has to be a
lot more intentional, a lot more
disciplined, and not lazy to make sure
that they keep themselves in check and
that they are actually digesting all of
this stuff that AI is telling them.
everything that's being written they
understand and they actually learn from
it not just blindly accepting code
because it's goes over their head they
don't understand it so in that sense I
think juniors do need to be more
disciplined but obviously there is still
the junior no one's talking about
replacing a junior at least I'm not
talking about replacing a junior the
idea that junior can catch up by using
AI is ridiculous they will barely learn
anything in the process highly disagree
with this all the work of verifying
teaching and feedback will be
responsibility of the rest of the team
this is the case with a junior
case with a junior on your team as well.
Like regardless of whether or not
they're using AI, you likely would get
people learning a lot slower as a
result. I disagree with this. I think
that more than ever now, juniors who are
actually really self-driven,
disciplined, who want to learn a lot,
have this amazing resource now. They can
ask questions and get them answered. I
remember when I was like 19, I was in
university. I really wanted to learn
more about game engines and like C++
programming and graphics programming. I
was like, I just loved that stuff. I was
really passionate about it. And no one
in university, at least not no one in my
university, could help me to the degree
that I wanted help. I would ask them
questions, they wouldn't know the
answers to them because I don't know,
they're either career academics or they
just haven't had C++ game engine
experience. Like that is kind of a
specialization. It's a bit of a narrow
field. It's not just like C++
programming in general. I mean, C++
isn't even that popular of a language
compared to like say JavaScript or like
Java or C. Like C++ is more of like a
low-level systems language. Like it's
not something that all of these
lecturers are going to have real
industry experience with. So that was
like quite hard for me. I was frustrated
constantly and then searching stuff
online like it's hard. It's hard to get
concrete answers to like difficult
questions just by Google searching. But
then I started working as an intern on
the engine team at EA. Working on a game
engine in Australia in 2015 was like,
you know, a handful of people did that.
A handful of engineers were working on a
AAA grade game engine in Australia. But
I was fortunate enough to land on that
team and suddenly when I asked
questions, they'd be answered like that.
It was like a superpower. It was
absolutely amazing and it was such a
useful resource to be able to ask all
these questions and have them instantly
answered. And this is now what kind of
exists with AI. Like yes, people like to
say that AI often gets things wrong and
it often hallucinates and like yes that
does happen, but in general it does
provide a lot of really valuable
information that you would otherwise
have no easy way of obtaining,
especially if you're not within the
industry. So this concept that they will
barely learn anything in the process by
using AI, that is ridiculous, Mr. Cool
56. I highly disagree with that. I mean,
just to give you an example, download
the Unreal Engine 5 source code, which
is available, open up like a clawude
agent in that repository, and just ask
it to like generate a report on certain
systems or tell you the general
architecture of this. And then you can
keep asking it questions. Okay, but why
did they make this decision? Why why is
this line of code written like this?
what's the deal with this? And it will
give you like a lot of really useful
information. How on earth would you do
that if you didn't have AI? Like I think
people genuinely don't understand just
how different things are right now with
this technology. But you need a special
kind of junior that again is going to
put in that effort to actually learn
from AI and like also talk to the other
engineers on the team for sure to make
sure that what it's saying is correct.
Like yeah, there's still that
skepticism, but like you know, a senior
engineer is also capable of saying
things that are just incorrect. Like
that's not a it's not like the human
senior engineer will always give you the
100% correct answer and AI will always
get things wrong. Lots of engineers
regardless of their experience level
will also make mistakes. So multiple
sources, multiple references, always
important. Every line of code almost is
a design choice. Be it a really small
design choice, it could matter a lot. It
could it might shape how we think about
the code in subtle ways. I don't feel
like I own the code that the agent
writes for me which makes it difficult
to even remember. This is true. This is
something that I think is is quite a
real problem because just the action of
typing. It's like if you're at a lecture
and you hear things and that's all you
do. You just listen. You're not going to
remember that anywhere near as well as
if you were also taking notes and
writing stuff down. That's sort of like
it's going to use different parts of
your brain and you're going to retain
that information a lot better. with AI,
if it's writing all the code for you
because you didn't physically type it
out. I agree with this. Like, it does
make it harder to remember and it's also
more exhausting reviewing the code cuz I
have to populate my mind with what the
LLM wrote and that requires a lot of
discipline and mental effort when I see
a lot output from the LLM all at once.
Yeah, these are all completely valid
points. But I will say that if you are
working in a large codebase, this is
just a general problem because there's
lots of parts that of course you
wouldn't have written. Stuff changes
very rapidly. There's lots of engineers,
lots of different teams working on
essentially a single kind of codebase,
even if it is modularized, which is why
a lot of like high-end software
engineering is more about reading code
than writing code. And I guess in this
case, yes, it will make things
potentially harder to remember than if
you had written out the code. And the
volume is just more as well. That's all
valid. My biggest problem with AI is
it's meant to replace humans. There
needs to be laws in place to protect
workers jobs. Corporations don't care
about how many people they lay off
because paying less people equals bigger
profit margins. I mean, I agree with
some of these. Uh this is just like this
has been the case forever. This is not
new because of AI. If anything, I think
maybe smaller companies are more likely
to lay people off because they can
collapse like three people's jobs into
one and they care a lot more about, you
know, maintaining their thinner profit
margins. That may be new because of AI,
but in general like layoffs have
happened all the time and like
overhiring happens very easily as well
for large corporations. whether or not
it's more than it otherwise would have
been because of AI is also a question
that I'm not sure I know the answer to.
Laws in place to protect workers jobs.
So the thing is like AI is so broad when
it comes to software engineering
specifically. The thing is that there's
always sort of a lack of software
engineering effort. There's always more
work to do. There's always more products
to build, to refine, to research.
There's so much that needs to be done
that yes, you could look at it as AI has
increased software engineers output. So
by let's just say three times just as an
average whatever I made that up. Three
times it's increased their output. So we
need a third of the engineers to achieve
the same amount of output that we had
before. That's one way to look at it. We
can just lay off 2/3 of our team. But
another way to look at it is our output
has increased by three times. That's
great. That's what we want. Let's keep
all those engineers because now we're
achieving three times the work we were.
And that's amazing. Three times more
work should translate to more profit and
more revenue as well. Presumably, if
you're running this well, it's also a
bit of a situation where a lot of the
people getting laid off, unfortunately,
are just low performers. They're just,
especially at these large corporations,
they can get pretty cruisy those jobs.
They can those people can get pretty
lazy. Not saying this is everyone who
gets laid off, but I feel like a lot of
these people getting laid off, there's a
reason why they got laid off compared to
other engineers that didn't get laid
off. And now that the output has
increased so much, if you're unable to
keep up with that, then yeah, it makes
sense that you fall into like that
bottom percentile and you will just get
laid off. Especially, of course, if the
company is trying to cut costs, which
generally they probably are. Now, is it
fair that the output has suddenly
increased and you're expected to do a
lot more work? Well, it's unfortunate,
but this is technology, this is
industry, it evolves, things change. You
now have a tool that allows you to do a
lot more. It's definitely not 10 times
more or 100 times more. That's crazy
because again, you still need to be
making sure that you are engineering the
code. You're just using AI to help you,
not to do it for you. But I think it's
fair to say that like my output has
increased, but my output has increased
naturally. It's not like I'm having
trouble keeping up with it. Like I have
this tool now that does a lot of it for
me. And even with all of the guiding,
the reviewing, the making sure that it's
doing the right thing, it still does it
a lot faster and better than I would
have in the same time frame. Like that
is just a fact in my experience. Maybe
I'm using it better than a lot of other
people. Maybe also I have the experience
to make sure that I'm using it properly
and that it's doing a good job. For me,
I set a rule for myself that I will
write the code myself and only use AI
for researching for stuffs I'm not aware
of or understanding a topic. But the
line of codes, I will write them myself.
This is also a valid way to use AI. I I
mean, I like using it to write stuff for
me. But using it for research is also
very valid and very valuable. But I have
a suspicion that as time goes on, people
who are doing this will also start to
switch across. I sat through this whole
thing. So, someone studying gamedev at
uni and I'm very deliberate about my
learning journey. This is very, very
important. Just as I have learned to
type faster without looking at the
keyboard, I hope one day I can write
code without using AI all the time. And
I still do write code. It's just that
again, you can use AI in so many
different ways. And one of them might be
just write some functions for me, just
some scaffolding, some empty functions
for me in this format. That's going to
probably be quicker than me typing them
out manually, especially if there's like
a lot of them. But then I might choose
to actually go through and handw write
that function. Like that's a thing that
still happens. Maybe you want to be
super deliberate, super precise about it
and you just don't want to go through AI
for that because maybe that will even
take longer if it's something relatively
simple or something that does need some
surgical precision. I think a good
comparison to that is handwritten
assembly. Like ffmpeg for example has a
lot of handwritten assembly. They could
have used compiler intrinsics. They
could have just let the C++ compiler
with vectorization turned on do the SIMD
stuff like for them, but it's just not
as good as the handwritten assembly.
Even now after all of this like compiler
development, it's still faster and more
precise to handwrite assembly to do
those performance critical operations.
As is with AI, a lot of the times what
you get is just not what you're looking
for and it's just faster and more
precise to handw write that C++ or
whatever programming language you're
using yourself. I will say though that
there are also many different levels of
AI. If you just ask it to write
something for you, it will probably pick
a simple common solution. But if you
make it known to AI that wo man like
this is AAA grade like where you're
playing with the big boys now. I need
you to write this in this way then it is
also capable of doing that. The thing is
it just won't do that. It won't do that
by default because it's not the most
common solution. it's going to go for
something maybe a bit more simple that
will save maybe some more tokens. It
doesn't need to reason about quite as
deeply. It will just go for that unless
you're very deliberate with the kind of
code that you expect from it. And again,
this comes back to you having to have
experience and some knowledge because
otherwise you don't know what is good
and what is bad. And that's a very
dangerous position to be in with AI.
Okay, thank you all for your comments. I
will probably read some more of them and
feel free to leave your thoughts of
course in the comment section below for
this video as well. It's gotten very
dark here. If there is if there's
anything you want me to know before I
start this game engine series, maybe
specific direction that you want to give
me as well or to make sure that I
include certain things as I'm making
these videos, definitely let me know as
well. But thank you all for watching.
I'm really excited to start this new
series. I will see you next time.
Goodbye.