So, we are preparing to release Hazel, my game engine, for free very soon. And part of that road map is basic
multiplayer. One of the two things that I'm currently working on. The other is the new render and renderer 2025, which
you may have seen me live stream for like the past month. By the way, all live stream VODs uploaded to my other
channel called Channel Unplugged. I'll leave a link to it in the description below. So, you can take a look at all the work that's going into that project
entirely on that channel and live on Twitch. Anyway, the other big thing that I'm basically simultaneously kind of
working on is basic multiplayer. Now, we started working on this the second half of last year and then kind of took a
little bit of a break because I wanted to focus on Render 2025 and now we're getting back into it. The way that we
left it last time was we had Genesis, this like game that was the first game that I ever made and then I'm remaking
it in 3D now in Hazel and it's also an MMO. Why not? That is now more or less running multiplayer. In fact, more work
has actually happened on Genesis 3D behind the scenes because Jim aka 0x has been working on animation for
networking. But anyway, that's besides the point. The point is we are getting back into multiplayer. We are getting back into Genesis 3D. And I thought that
a good way to kind of revive this project would be to share with you how exactly multiplayer works in Hazel and
what my plans are for it is basically implemented to the degree that I want it to be when we ship this first version of
Hazel. I think it's more about refinement now. But here's the thing. As I show you all of this and I walk you
through how everything works and the kind of experience that I've designed, I want you to think about it and give me
some feedback. I have only ever professionally worked at EA like on Frostbite, Osiris, like engines there.
Obviously, at that scale, things are very different and I haven't really made any kind of multiplayer indie game or
anything myself. My goal with Hazel is to try and keep things as simple as possible, which you're probably going to
see in this like multiplayer design and implementation. So, for those of you who might have some experience or have tried
to make multiplayer games in other engines such as Unity, GDAU, Unreal, maybe you'll have some opinions or some
weird things that I'm doing here that are going to make it more difficult for you to potentially use Hazel in the future to make some sort of worked or
multiplayer game. So without further ado, let's take a look at Hazel and how this whole multiplayer thing works. I
think the first thing I'll show you is this is Genesis inside Hazelnut, Hazel's editor. And then I've also got in VS
Code here. I've connected to an actual server. This is a hosting a server. And I have this run server command which is
going to run the Hazel headless server. So this is also Hazel compiled on Linux
and then uploaded like to this hosting server. If I go ahead and run the server, you can see it's going to start
this scene called main, which is this scene inside Hazel that we are currently looking at. And then if I flip back into
Hazel, with that now running, I can hit play. And you can see it's going to actually connect to the server. The
reason I know it's connected is because first of all, the time over here is counting down, and the server is the
authority for that time. We also have this object here, which is like a little test physics object that is entirely
contained within the server. So the the reason we're seeing this now is because the client is receiving data from the
server and telling it to actually like render this cube at a position, but the actual physics simulation is happening.
Well, we can't replay it cuz it's already been the physics simulation has already happened. But if I disconnect and reconnect, you can see how uh like
another female spawns over here, and their positions are also entirely dictated by the server. But my point
with the cube was just that when the server starts, there's like a physics simulation that plays. that drops out of the sky, lands on this plane, and that
is entirely simulated on the server just as a little test. But anyway, these females moving around here, these female
entities, which are the pink girls here, they are entirely controlled by the server. And that logic is actually
written in C, much like you would just write client side code for a game in Hazel. So that's really nice. It's not
like custom or anything. It's actually all within this project. Now you can see here they're not actually animating and
that's because we don't have Jim's worked animation code within this branch over here. But that is in fact working.
Maybe I'll show some video on the screen right about now. Anyway, the other thing I can do with this still running is I
can start an instance of the runtime just to get another instance of Hazel up
and running. So I believe we have a build of uh Genesis for the runtime. So if I just try and it's not even
compiled. So, if I just try and run the runtime while the editor is also running, then we should be able to connect. Oh, yeah. We don't have
textures here for some reason because they're disabled. But if we have a look at this, we should actually be able to
find each other. So, where's the other player? So, you can see there's only one other like green player. So, if we run
to him over here, as I run to him, we should be able to see it inside the Hazel Klein. And you can see I'm kind of
walking around. And if I switch to this one and walk around, we're going to see it move inside the editor. So, there you
go. So, that's networking working. And at the moment, you can have like as many of these clients as you want. And
obviously, like the time is all synchronized. I don't think I'm laying it out properly here. That's why it's
being cut off. And also, I think when the seconds get down to zero, like 1 minute and 6 seconds, it's not displayed correctly. Anyway, that none of that
matters. This is in development. Anyway, the point is we are seeing obviously real-time multiplayer happening over
here. So now let's discuss how it's actually implemented both client side and server side and also my idea for
what it would look like to actually make a multiplayer game such as this one in Hazel. So obviously you can't really
have multiplayer without a server. And over here we are running on a Hostinger VPS. Now Hostinger have actually been
nice enough to sponsor this video as well as all of like these multiplayer networking projects that we've been working on for Hazel. And my experience
with using Hostinger servers for both my websites as well as all of this multiplayer networking stuff has just
been amazing. They've been great. Whether you just need a simple website or a powerful VPS, Hostinger have got you covered with some of the best value
I've ever seen. I've been personally using their VPSs for years for everything from simple websites to high performance web apps and game servers,
and they've never let me down. For Hazel's multiplayer, we're using their KVM servers. Across all of their plans,
hosting VPS's use powerful hardware such as NVME SSD storage and AMD epic
processes. This gives you super fast and responsive website or app performance. Of course, you also get full route
access so you can do whatever you need on your server. They've got some great security features such as DOS protection and userfriendly firewall configurations
as well as free automatic backups and real-time snapshots. Now, I recommend that you start off with this KVM2 plan
here. It's a great little server and it's really great value. However, if you do find that you need more resources,
hosting a scalability means that you can easily switch that over to a more powerful plan. Once you've selected a
server plan, make sure that you use coupon code churno at checkout for an additional 10% discount. Server setup is
super simple. You just pick a location and they've even got this like real-time latency so that you can pick the best server for you or for your users. They
have a huge amount of operating systems to choose from. This one here that we're using for Hazel is Abuntu 24 just like
our actual Linux computer that's in the office. And then finally, you can set a root password, which you'll need for SSH
access. Once that server sets up, which doesn't take very long at all, you can just SSH in and do whatever you need to
do. They also have a really great dashboard, which has everything you would expect, as well as some great documentation to help you out. So, for
all of your website and server needs, head to hosting.com/cho. Link will be in description below, and use coupon code
churno to get an additional 10% off for yearly plans. Huge thank you as always to Hostinger for providing us with some
excellent servers and for sponsoring this video. Okay, so taking a look at all of the infrastructure I guess that
we have for networking inside Hazel. It's basically all contained within this module called Hazelnet. There is some
code outside of that such as like the C script glue so that we can call some of these functions and use this
functionality from C and it kind of links back into C++ but the actual bulk
of everything is inside Hazelnet. And you can see here there's like six files here. There's it's very very minimal.
It's very small. It's very simple. That's the keyword of this whole this whole project. So we have a client. We
have a server and then we just have some like some utilities right to like resolve. I think we've got like one utility basically. Well actually this
will check if it's a valid IP address and this will resolve a domain name. So that aside we have this client and
server architecture. Now, the core of all of this networking functionality starts with this library called Game Networking Sockets by Valve. And so,
because it's by Valve, you could expect that it's quite well suited to video games. I'll leave a link to this in the
description below. It's open source on GitHub. And it also doesn't actually need Steam. So, Valve, of course, makes
Steam. So, you might think that they only want to enforce this for like Steam games, but it works with both Steam and
completely outside of Steam. Obviously, we are not using Steam at the moment inside Hazel with the demo that I showed
you and everything is working. So, it's a really, really nice library. It's quite popular as well. It kind of
combines the best of TCP and UDP because obviously you want this to be performant and work well for game engines and
games. Anyway, I'm not going to talk too much about this. I actually kind of covered this a little bit as part of walnut networking because funnily
enough, walnut networking is basically what you see here inside Hazel. I basically stole Hazel's networking
implementation which uses Valve's game networking sockets from Walnut my own
library. So Walnut networking is open source. You can see over here this repository is public. If you go into
source walnut networking you'll see the same six files. Now they've been adapted to Hazel a little bit differently. You
can see this name space for example is Hazelnet and over here it would be Walnut. And I probably have maybe fixed
some bugs or added some features. But if you want to take a look at Hazel's kind of networking API, then it's it is
actually open source as part of Walnut. I'll leave that repository in the description below as well. Anyway, all
of that aside, let me take you through the API. So, I guess we'll start with the server. So, the idea is you need
something to run a server. Typically, you would make an actual application that is the server. So, if we take a
look at Hazelnet, this is the net branch of the Hazel repository. I should probably also mention that for those of
you who do have access to Hazel via patreon.com/thecho for $10 a month. Thank you for helping to support the project over here on the Hazel
repository which you get access to instantly when you support the project. You'll see there is a net branch and so
this net branch that's what I'm showing over here. So the other branches are quite different because they have no
networking functionality. Obviously this will be eventually merged into like the main branch. But over here inside the
net branch we actually have a few different solutions. So, we've got Hazel, Hazel client, Hazel headless, and
Hazel server. Hazel headless you don't really need to worry about. And Hazel just combines everything. So, Hazel client and Hazel server are the two
solutions that I generally use. I've been inside the client one, but if we open up the server one, this is probably
a little bit better to look at since we're discussing the server. You'll see this project over here under the net
folder called Hazel server, which we didn't see in that other solution. And that has some other stuff here, but the
actual core networking API is still inside this Hazelnet module. So this is its own project. I'm going to try and
run it now. I don't think I really ran it this year. It still works though which is great. And so you can see this is the GUI version of the server. So we
have the headless version which is running on Linux over here. And obviously this is also compiled on Linux. This is compiled on Windows
obviously and you can run this as a GUI or as a headless server as well. So we
can run this within like terminal command prompt as a console application. But this is the GUI version which might
be nice if you want to like see some more information visually like the clients that are connected and you can also send messages. I mean you can do
that through uh the command line obviously as well. But anyway I made two versions. GUI version the GUI version I
think also does work on Linux because when I was working on Hazel server on Linux cuz I needed to get it compiling
on Linux to actually deploy it onto a proper VPS like this. I think I started with probably the GUI one which works
because Hazel works on Linux and then I did the headless build. Anyway, most of the code inside Hazel server is for
actually running Hazel itself. So, not it's not really server specific per se, but we still need to do things like open
the project, do basically all of the game engine things that you would do, just not the rendering. And the reason
why is because we still want the entire game engine to like run in the server
because in most multiplayer games, you need the server to be the authority for
everything that happens like in the scene in the gameplay that is happening because you obviously can't trust the
clients because any client could just modify itself and then do whatever it wants to. So, for example, something
seemingly as simple as just those females at the start moving randomly, the server needs to be the one to spawn
them. Obviously, tell all the clients that, hey, there is an entity here at this location. It's moving around like
this. But then, how do you handle things like collision? Oh, well, you need the physics system. And the server needs to
be aware of all of the players, all of the kind of collidable objects, like the the terrain, the map, all of that stuff
so that it can actually do that physics simulation. and then just tell all the clients that's what's happening. Whenever the player moves and it needs
to do a physics simulation, it could just hack itself to go through walls, for example. So, the server needs to
actually do that simulation as well and then be like, "Yeah, that that's legit." Like, the client has moved into a
plausible location, so we can now transmit that to all the other clients. You basically need to run the entire
game on the server, just minus the rendering. Typically, you might actually want to keep the rendering if you want
to be able to observe things as a server itself. Although, typically, you would just connect as like a client and then
in be able to inspect everything. So, we don't actually do any rendering really uh as part of the server. At least Hazel
doesn't do its normal scene rendering. We do like the I'm GUI rendering, the UI rendering you saw for the GUI version of
the server. Anyway, that's why this is a little bit complicated because it's not just as simple as the server receiving
data and then reformatting it or whatever and then transmitting it to all the other clients. It actually has to play the game itself. So, that's what
most of this stuff that you see here is. As far as the actual API goes, it is dead simple, but it's also up to the
game to actually control how the server gets started and if it gets started and how that works, what it does with data
that it receives, and also the client side of things. So, connecting to a server, sending data to a server, none
of that stuff is actually controlled in the C++ code. We just make an API. We
make it available and then it's up to the game to use that API to kind of pull the puppet strings to make multiplayer
happen. So we provide quite a primitive set of tools. You can see here that in client for example the API it's just got
the ability to connect to a server to disconnect and then we can set these like data received callbacks. that we
can respond to ourselves receiving data or connecting to a server, disconnecting from a server and then we have an API to
be able to send data just as binary data or strings. That's basically it. And
then from the servers API, it's basically got the same thing. You create the server object, you start it with a
particular port and then you can set these like data received, client connected, client disconnected, all of these callbacks to respond to certain
events as well as send data. And then you've got some other utilities like being able to kick clients and then
these clients will persist inside this connected clients map. And that is because Valve's game networking sockets
library actually maintains persistent connections. So really it's doing all of the heavy lifting. We're just providing
an API for this inside Hazel as well as managing like the connections to some degree in a way that games might want to
utilize this functionality. And that really was my goal with this because I
first of all don't have enough experience in networking and multiplayer to make really strong design decisions
to kind of try and shape a path that is somehow going to suit all kinds of games
that people might want to make. Even games that I wanted to make like I really didn't feel comfortable trying to
design this kind of okay this is how multiplayer games work in Hazel. you
just multiplayer equals true, then suddenly entities will synchronize magically between the client and the
server. No, none of that stuff was first of all even appealing to me. Like I I don't think I would want to make a
multiplayer game that just automatically somehow works behind the scenes and then realize that actually this isn't going
to work or I want to do this extra thing that's not supported. But then the other side of this coin here is that it would
be a lot of work to do something like that. So apart from this like trying to design this blind which is not a great
idea, it was also that's going to take a significant amount of resources and I mean the first real game that I
personally want to make with Hazel like proper premium game that's not even multiplayer. That's not I don't really
want to make a multiplayer game. So I don't want to say that multiplayer is like this afterthought inside Hazel. I
just wanted Hazel to be able to have networking functionality so that you could theoretically make multiplayer
games. But I didn't want to go too hard on locking in some kind of design that all users would then have to adhere to.
This does obviously slightly complicate things for games because they then have to implement the actual multiplayer
design, you could say, themselves. However, it also gives them the freedom to kind of build their own architecture
on top of Hazel that just uses this low-level API. Well, relatively low-level API. And that obviously gives
the games a lot of flexibility. And that's not to say that Hazel isn't even aware that it has multiplayer. Of
course, it is. So, for example, in this editor scene that we were looking at, if we click on this cube, you can see I've
called it server cube and it's also a different color. Some of these entities are different colors. And if we click on
it, you can see that it has a domain and that domain is set to server. So, you can set this domain to client, server,
or both. What this means is that these entities, even though I can create them, visually design them, do anything I
want. like you know this server cube for example is a static mesh. It has a rigid body and it has a box collider. The only
reason by the way that it's a static mesh is just so that I can see it over here inside the viewport because it's set to server. You can see that if I hit
play, it's gone. It's not actually in the scene. And that's because this is obviously the client that I'm now
playing. However, it does exist on the server and so does the plane because there needs to be a plane. That's what
the cube collides with. By the way, this secondary cube here is client cube. But this is just an entity that takes its
positions from the server. You can see it doesn't even have any physics on it because it's just going to be receiving
data from this cube which only exists on the server and then just setting its position to that so that we can see it
inside the client. And then we have this server entity which also has its domain set to server and then it has a script a
C# script attached to it which has a prefab over here as well as this script class genesis.server manager. So if we
flip over here to the C solution, this is all of the scripts, all of the behavior for this entire project. You
can see that there are actually two projects here that are game side. There's Genesis 3D and there's Genesis
3D.server. So on this net branch and going forward for Hazel, there's now going to be two different projects. I
think if you perhaps choose to make a game that completely doesn't have multiplayer, you probably wouldn't see
this project, but since this is like a multiplayer setup game, you would. So inside Genesis 3D.server, there's that
server manager C# script that we saw over here inside the script component. And this server manager is actually
where all of this functionality that is running the server is actually implemented. And you can see that this
is just simply an entity inside Hazel. And so it has an onreate function. And then look at what it does. It uses that
server API which maps to C++ to create a server and start it on this port. And
then it connects up all of these callbacks to these functions. It also does some actual Hazel things as well,
such as locating entities and some logic like starting a new round by resetting the round timer. And then inside the on
update function, I mean, here we're deliberately sleeping for 20 milliseconds, just cuz we don't want it to run too fast, and we don't currently
have a way to limit the amount of ticks or updates that a server will do per second. It counts down the round timer,
which is the timer that we saw on all of the clients. It processes this event queue of actions. It updates the clients
by sending the locations of all the females as well as all of the players. And so if we take a look at this for
example, how do we send the player positions to all of the clients? This is
how it works in a very very primitive way. And I've deliberately left it like this so that you can see just how simple
and basic this is. And the idea is you build your own functionality, your own API, your own architecture on top of
this to make this obviously higher level. But at its core, we just create this new buffer. That's the size of the
buffer. It's it's calculated like this just because it's counting the sizes of all the variables we're packing into it.
The first bite here is kind of like the type of packet it is. And you'll see this when I show you what the client
does with the data it receives. And then we just use this buffer.block copy function to actually convert all the
data from various variable types. So this is like an integer, for example. We're just converting it to bytes. And then we're writing it into this buffer
at a particular offset. And that's just the size of the data. Then we just increment the offset by the size of data
that we wrote into there. And we go through like all of the players inside here. And then we're just basically sending the players entity ID so that
the client knows which player this data is for. And then just the translation and the rotation as floats. Once we pack
all of this stuff into this buffer into this byte array, we then just call server send buffer to all clients and we
send that bite buffer. It's that simple. Now on top of this you could of course write your own networking library where
you can just basically give it like a bunch of player entities and then it packs it itself and then the client
decodes it in a reliable way as well. You could use some external serialization library. It's really up to
you how you want to deal with this and how you want to send data between the client and the server. That's all on
you. And so you have the flexibility to really make this fit your needs. This little test by the way here directly in
the on update function is that cube. So you can see we have the server side cube. We just grab its translation and
rotation and we just send that buffer to all clients as well. Now as for receiving the data server side we have
on data received and then what that will do is from a particular client ID it will receive this bite array of data and
then we can decode it. So the way that I'm encoding this data in a very simple way here is the first bite is like the
type. So if it's one then it's a position update and we respond accordingly. If it's something else we
do other stuff. This mostly applies to the clients because it looks like the server only receives one type of data
over here. But you can see it decodes the data from that bite array. And then
since this is actually called from the network thread, we cue using a concurrent Q which is thread safe. We
cue this functionality to happen later inside the onupdate function on the main
thread. And that is just to basically try and retrieve the appropriate player and set its data. So for example, update
its position and rotation when players initially connect. That's why you saw this happen over here. Client connected.
We just happened to spawn a female. That's why every time we rejoined, you saw like another pink female entity
appear. And then we add the info about this player to this dictionary which is
the player or the entity ID mapping to the player info which contains all of this information. Actually, sorry, this
is not the entity ID. This is the client ID. And then going through that, we then know to iterate through it and obviously
transmit all of that to all of the other entities. Client disconnected obviously works the same way. And then console
message event is just a way for us to be able to kind of communicate to the server to this C behavior through the
console of the server while it's running. So for example, if the message starts with R, we just reset the cube.
Actually, that's something that I probably should have showed you. So if we hit play, then we see this cube, which remember I said is controlled by
the server. So, if I put this over here, let's put this here. What I'll do now is I'll just type in the letter R and hit
enter. And you can see that on the client, it's respawned. And that simulation that you're seeing, that physics simulation is completely done on
the server using Jolt, our physics engine. So, this is just a way for us to obviously do that. And then you can also
see if there are two values inside the message, then it will I think this will actually spawn a female on the client.
So you can see that the ID for the message is actually zero. So if we go over here to the client Genesis client
and we have a look at this, this is a good time to transition to the client behavior. You can see that on the client
side again just an entity inside Hazel. We use this Hazel networking API. So Hazel.net.client over here. We create
one of these and we try to connect to this server address which you can see is actually set to us.studio.com
port 8192 which is this running hosting a server. And if we go to the data received event, you can see that if the
type is zero, we do in fact spawn a female at the coordinates that come in. So let's try that. If I I'm probably
close to the origin. So if I just type in 0 0 and hit enter, then you can see we just spawned a female there. Let's
try 2 two or something. That's over there. Maybe minus 2 - 2. And you can
see we are spawning these females. In fact, they're even making children already. Look at that. Happy family.
Okay. So, uh, on the client side, it's the same thing as you would expect.
We're just sending these bite arrays. We're receiving them. We're decoding the messages to see what to do with that.
The client side obviously has to also contain these like remote player and female containers because it's entirely
in charge of processing that data and spawning its own entities creating its
own entities client side which represent the remote entities that are actually existing on the server and being
simulated and whose behavior is being dictated entirely by the server. And that's it. I don't really have anything
else to say. Things like client client prediction, lag compensation, none of that exists. It's just raw primitive
sending bytes to and from like the client, the server. It's completely up to the game to actually make the
multiplayer work well and in a way that suits your particular game. Because, for
example, if you're just making a turn-based game, you don't really care about like lag compensation or like
client side prediction. Maybe you just want to be able to communicate with a central authority that is your server.
And maybe you just want to have like two clients and you want to make a chess game. Like you can do all of that really easily with all of this without having
that complexity on top of it. That not only might make it harder for you to
design the system that you want, but it's also going to make it hard for me and the team because we have to spend time with our very limited resources
implementing all of that here whereas it might not even fit the your needs like well. So that is basically where we are
at. Where would I go from here to improve this? because obviously as you can see it works pretty well and to be
honest the API is not actually too bad. What I would do is I probably would provide some kind of C side
serialization because this is obviously really annoying to deal with even if the game would prefer to write this stuff
itself. That's great and it can definitely do that because we're going to leave this kind of low-levelness
around. However, I would also like games to just, especially if it's like a sandbox or a prototype game or you're
doing a game jam to just be able to be like, "Hey, look, I got these three entities or here's my list of entities.
I just want to send all of that to the clients, for example, cuz I'm running that on the server." Or I'm the client.
I need to I need to send like my position. If we have a look at on update, then I'm sure we'll see send
player data. So, if we're connected to the server, we're going to send player data, at which point it's going to get our current player entity, the
translation, the rotation, and then encode it. All of this stuff should be more or less automatic to do. I don't
think that this should be something that you always have to do primitively like this. So, I would probably build some
kind of higher level way to just send data, but again, it's still going to come down to just sending byte arrays.
That I'm obviously not going to change or make automatic like synchronization for, but just this part. And that's
really easy. You can just use a third party serialization library or we could just provide something really simple
within Hazel, which is probably what I would be leaning towards, especially because Hazel, the C++ side of Hazel
actually has a pretty nice serialization API. Like over here, for example, inside the C++ code, mesh runtime serializer.
This is responsible for serializing meshes into our runtime format. Serialized to asset pack has a file
stream writer that it takes in. This is Hazel serialization API and you can see that when it comes to writing data all
it has to do is do like stream.right raw here's actually a strruct being passed in that's like a pod strruct with just
obviously data and no like interaction with via pointers or anything in there and then we just do stream.right raw or
stream.right zero because we have to leave some space to then later come back to write array to write this vector I'm
guessing of nodes. We have all of these tools available to us. We can set the stream position back now that we have
the metadata to actually write that in. This is obviously much easier and this is in C++. So designing something like
this potentially inside C as well shouldn't take more than like a day max of work and I think it will obviously
improve the user experience for doing uh simple things dramatically. Anyway, that is pretty much my overview over how
multiplayer works inside Hazel. when Hazel officially gets released and it's
free and it's more or less stable and all the branches are merged together. Obviously, I'm going to probably make a
tutorial that shows you how to actually make a game from zero that uses this and
is multiplayer. I don't want to do that yet because it's not finalized and the Hazel is not free yet, so not as many
people are going to want to use it. But for those of you who are interested and would like a tutorial, then that will
come in the future. So, please let me know what you think of this primitive flexible. You know, we could paint it in
in two different lights. Either you could say it's like really basic and primitive, or you could say it's really flexible and it's dictated by the actual
game project, which is great. I don't know. But I think it's uh quite nice. In my experience, using it obviously for
this uh has been pretty simple and pretty easy. If you are working on more serious projects like I don't know a
first person shooter like Counter Strike then you'd probably want quite a lot of client side prediction lag compensation
obviously stuff to make it more fair and also what happens if you start dropping some packets and like there's a lot of
edge cases and there's a lot of like refinement I guess and polish that would need to be done especially for a competitive level game. However, I'm not
an expert in that and I feel like games that are multiplayer at their core and that's such an important core experience
to that specific game might want to design their own system around it since that's so important to that game. And
since Hazel provides so much other stuff like rendering and physics and all that, if you wanted to make a multiplayer game
and you wanted more control, then maybe Hazel would be an engine you would pick because you could spend as much time as
you want in both C++ and C designing the perfect multiplayer system using our tools potentially and you could really
refine it and make it your way. If you would like to support the Hazel project and help us get closer to our free
release, then please go to patreon.com/thecherno. You can sign up and get instant access to all of Hazel's source code, including
all of the branches like this net branch. All of everything I've shown you here, all of this engine side functionality that I've shown you here,
you can get access to instantly right now. And a huge thank you as always to all the supporters that make Hazel
possible. If you need web hosting or servers, then definitely go to hosting.com/churno and use my coupon code churn for an
extra 10% discount. Link will be in description below. If you have any more requests for something that maybe I
didn't cover today or that you'd like me to take a look at, also leave them in the comment section below. Thank you all for watching. I'll see you next time.
Goodbye.